
THE MODERN LIBRARY 
of the World's Best Booths 

•»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»^ 


THE 

FORTY DAYS 

OF 

MUSA DAGH 



»»»»»»»>»»»»^»»»»>»»»•» 

The publishers will be pleased to send, upon 
request, an illustrated folder setting forth 
the purpose and scope of ihe mopern 
LIBRARY, and listing each volume in the 
series Every reader of boo\s will find 
titles he has been looking for, handsomely 
printed, in unabridged editions, and 
at an unusually low price. 


>»»»»»»»»»»»>»»»»»»»>»>»> 



THE FORTY DAYS 


OF 

MUSA DAGH 

By 

FRANZ WERFEL 

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN 
BY GEOFFREY DUNLOP 



THE MODERN LIBRARY 


NE'W' YORK 


COPYRIGHT, 1933, BY PAUL ZSOLNAY VERLAG A.G., 
BERLIN-VIENNA-LEIPZIG 

COPYRIGHT, 1934, BY THE VIKING PRESS, INC. 
»»»»»»»>»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»» 1 ^> 



THE MODERN LIBRARY 

IS PUBLISHBP BY 

RANDOM HOUSE, INC. 

BBHHETT A CEKY - DONALDS KLOPYEK • BOBEKTK. HAAS 

^<^anufactured tn the Untied States of America 
PmUed try Parkway Prinlmg Company Bound ky H Wolf 



FRANZ WERFEL 

(1890— ) 


A NOTE ON THE AUTHOR OF “THE FORTY DAYS 
OF MUSA DAGH” 

To the American reader and theatregoer, Franz Werfel is known 
principally for his heroic novel, The Forty Days of Musa Dagh, and his 
two plays, Goat Song and fuarez and Maxtmthan, both produced by the 
Theatre Guild in New York. In Europe his poetry first brought him 
recognition and established him as a youthful leader of a growing spirit- 
ual movement. Subsequently his novels added to his stature as a man of 
letters all over the world. The son of wealthy Jewish parents, Werfel 
was born in Prague, Czechoslovakia. Every advantage of education and 
travel was lavished on him. As a student at a Prague gymnasium and 
later at the University of Leipzig, he devoted himself to the study of 
philosophy, and at the age of twenty-two, he became a lecturer in phi- 
losophy at his own university. The World War interrupted and ter- 
minated his academic career; he served from 1915 to 1917 in the Ger- 
man army on the Russian front. The impact of this experience has been 
evident in all his post-war writings. Abandoning scholastic work for the 
career of a writer, Werfel moved to Vienna, where he has lived since. 
Today he is an illustrious exile from the country which he served dur- 
ing the War. The Forty Days of Musa Dagh was written in 1932-33 
and reflects the admiration and compassion he felt for the plight of the 
Armenian people when they faced and resisted extermination. 



Note 

Tms book was conceived in March of 1929, in the course of a 
stay in Damascus. The miserable sight of some maimed and 
famished-looking refugee children, working in a carpet fac- 
tory, gave me the final impulse to snatch from the Hades of 
all that was, this incomprehensible destiny of the Armenian 
nation. The writing of the book followed between July 193a 
and March 1933. Meanwhile, in November, on a lecture tour 
through German cities, the author selected Chapter V of Book 
1 for public readings. It was read in its present form, based on 
the historic records of a conversation between Enver Pasha 
and Pastor Johannes Lepsius. 

Breitenstein, Spring /pjj. 



Contents 


BOOK ONE: COMING EVENTS 

1. TESKEKE 3 

2 . KONAK — HAMAM — SELAMUK 22 

3. THE NOTABLES OF YOGHONOLUK 4I 

4. THE FIRST INCIDENT 6 ^ 

5. INTERLUDE OF THE GODS I23 

6. THE GREAT ASSEMBLY 152 

7. THE FUNERAL OF THE BELLS 236 

BOOK TWO: THE STRUGGLE OF THE 
WEAK 

1. LIFE ON THE MOUNTAIN 295 

2 . THE EXPLOITS OF THE BOYS 338 

3. THE PROCESSION OF FIRE 395 

4. SATo’s WAYS 483 

BOOK THREE: DISASTER, RESCUE, 
THE END 

1. INTERLUDE OF THE GODS 529 

2. STEPHAN SETS OUT AND RETURNS 566 

vii 



3* pain 6i2 

4. DECLINE AND TEMPTATION 637 

5. THE ALTAR FLAME 679 

6. THE SCRIPT IN THE FOG 754 

7. TO THE INEXPLICABLE IN US AND ABOVE Usl 81I 

LIST OF CHARACTERS 819 

GLOSSARY OF ARMENIAN AND TURKISH TERMS 82I 


▼ili 



BOOK ONE 


COMING EVENTS 

“How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and 
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?” 

Revelation vi, lo 




1 


Teskerc 


“How did I get here?” 

Gabriel Bagradian really spoke these solitary words without 
knowing it. Nor did they frame a question, but something 
indehnite, a kind of ceremomous amazement, which filled 
every inch of him. The clear glitter of this Sunday in March 
may have inspired it, in this Syrian spring, which shepherded 
flocks of giant anemones down along the flanks of Musa Dagh 
and far out across the irregular plain of Antioch. Everywhere 
their bright blood sprang from the meadow slopes, stifling 
the more reticent white of big narcissi, whose time had also 
come. A golden, invisible humming seemed to have encased 
the mountain. Were these the vagrant swarms of the hives of 
Kebussiye, or was it the surge of the Mediterranean, audible 
in the bright transparency of the hour, eroding the naked back 
of Musa Dagh^ The uneven road wound upwards, in and out 
among fallen walls. Then, where it suddenly ended in heaps 
of stone, It narrowed out into a sheep-track. He had come to 
the top of the outer slope. 

Gabriel Bagradian turned. His shape, in rough European 
homespun, straightened itself, listening. He thrust the fez a 
httle back off his damp forehead. His eyes were set wide apart. 
They were a shade lighter, but not in the least smaller than 
Armenian eyes usually arc. 

Now Gabriel saw what he had come from. The house 
gleamed out, with its dazzlmg walls, its flat roof, between the 
eucalyptus trees of the park. The stables, too, and the out* 

3 



houses, glittered in this early morning sunshine. Although be- 
tween Bagradian and his property there was now more than 
half an hour’s walk, it sull looked so close to him that it 
might have been following at his heels. And further along 
the valley the church of Yoghonoluk, with its big cupolas and 
pointed, gabled minarets at the sides, greeted him clearly. 
This solemn, massive church and Bagradian’s villa formed an 
entity. Bagradian’s grandfather, the fabled founder and bene- 
factor, had built them both fifty years ago. It was the custom of 
Armenian peasants and craftsmen, after their journeys abroad 
— to America even — ^in search of profit, to return home, into 
the nest. But bourgeois grown rich had other notions. They 
built their luxury villas along the Riviera from Cannes, among 
the gardens of Heliopolis, or at least on the slopes of Lebanon, 
in the neighbourhood of Beirut. Old Avetis Bagradian had 
drawn a definite line of demarcation between himself and 
such new-rich. He, the founder of that world-famous Istanbul 
business, which had offices in Paris, New York, and London, 
resided, in so far as his time and affairs allowed him to do 
so, year after year in his villa above the hamlet of Yoghono- 
luk, under Musa Dagh. But not only Yoghonoluk; the other 
six Armenian villages ot the district of Suedia had basked in 
the rich blessing of his kingly presence in their midst. Quite 
apart from the schools and churches built by him — from his 
summoning of American mission teachers — let it suflEce to in- 
dicate the gift which in spite of every other event remained, 
even today, fresh in the memory of his people: that shipload 
of Singer sewing-machines which after a more than usually 
prosperous business year Avetis had distributed among fifty 
needy famihes in the villages. 

Gabriel — ^he had still not turned his hstemng gaze away 
from the villa — ^had known his grandfather. He had been born 
in the house down there and spent many long months of 
his childhood m it. Till his twelfth year. And yet this early 
life, which was, after all, his own life, seemed so unreal that 

4 



It almost hurt to think of it. It seemed like a kind of life in 
the womb, the vague memories of which stir the soul to un- 
welcome shudderings. Had he really ever known his grand- 
father, or only read of him and seen his pictures in a story 
book? A httle man with a white goatee, in a long black-and- 
yellow-striped silk gown. His gold eyeglass dangling from a 
chain upon his chest. In red shoes he had walked over the 
grass of the garden. Everyone bowed deeply. Tapered old 
man’s fingers stroked the boy’s cheeks. Had it all happened, 
or was It no more than empty dreaming? To Gabriel 
Bagradian his grandfather and Musa Dagh connoted the same. 
When a few weeks ago he had first beheld again that mount of 
his childhood, that darkening ridge against the sunset, he 
had been invaded by indescribable, terrifying, and yet delight- 
ful sensations. Their depths had refused to reveal themselves. 
He had at once given up the attempt. Had it been the first 
breath of a presentiment? Or only these twenty-three years? 

Twenty-three years of Europe, Pans! Years of complete as- 
similation. They were as good as twice, or three times, that. 
They extinguished everything. After the old man’s death his 
family, absolved at last from the local patriotism of its founder, 
had escaped this Oriental nook. The firm’s bead office was, 
and remained, Istanbul. But Gabriel’s parents had lived with 
their two sons in Pans. Yet Gabriel’s brother — he, too, had 
been called Avetis — about fifteen years Gabriel’s senior, had 
soon disappeared. He went back to Turkey, as active partner 
in the importing-house. Not unfittingly had he been given 
his grandfather’s name. With him, after some years of neg- 
lect, the villa in Yoghonoluk reassumed its seigniorial status. 
His one amusement had been hunting, and with Yoghonoluk 
as his base he set forth into the Taurus mountains and to the 
Harun. Gabriel, who scarcely had known his brother, had 
been sent to a Pans lycee and then to study at the Sorbonne. 
No one insisted on putting him into the business, to which 
he, a miraculous exception in his family, would not have been 

5 



suited in the least. He had been allowed to live as a scholar* 
a bel espnt, an archaeologist, a historian of art, a philosopher* 
and in addition had been adlotted a yearly income which made 
him a free, even a very well-to-do, man. Still quite young, he 
had married Juhette. This marriage had worked a profound 
change m him. The Frenchwoman had drawn him her way. 
At present he was more French than ever. Armeman still, but 
only in a sense — academically. Still, he did not forget it alto- 
gether, and at times published a scientific article in an Ar- 
menian paper. And, at ten years old, Stephan, his son, had 
been given an Armenian tutor, so that he imght be taught the 
speech of his fathers. At first all this had seemed entirely use- 
less, harmful even, to Juliette. But, since she happened td 
like young Samuel Avakian, she had surrendered, after a few 
retreating skirmishes. Their tiffs had always the same origin. 
Yet, no matter how hard Gabriel might try to concern him- 
self with the politics of foreigners, he was still sometimes 
drawn back into those of his people. Since he bore a respected 
name, Armenian leaders, whenever they were in Pans, would 
come to call on him. He had even been offered the leadership 
of the Dashnakzagan party. Though he retreated in terror 
from this suggestion, he at least had taken part in that famous 
congress which, in 1907, united the Young Turks with Ar- 
menian nationahsts. An empire was to be grounded in which 
the two races should live at peace side by side and not dis- 
honour each other. Such an object excited even an alienated 
enthusiasm. In those days Turks had paid Armenians the most 
charming comphments, declaring their love. Gabriel, as his 
habit was, took these compliments more seriously than other 
people. That was why, when the Balkan war broke out, he 
had volunteered. He had been hastily trained in the school 
for reservist oflScers in Istanbul and had just had time to fight, 
as the officer of a howitzer battery, at the battle of Bulair. 
This one long separation from his family had lasted over six 
months. He had missed them greatly. He may have feared 

6 



that Juliette would slip away from him. Something seemed 
imperilled in their rdationship though he could not have 
given a reason for any such feeling. He was a thinker, an 
abstract man, an individual. What did the Turks matter, what 
the Armemans^ He had thoughts of taking French citizen- 
ship. That, above all, would have made Juliette happy. But 
always, in the end, the same vague uneasiness had prevented 
it. He had volunteered for the war. Even if he did not hve in 
his country, he could at least always re-evoke it. His fathers’ 
country. 

These fathers had suffered in it monstrously and still not 
given It up. Gabriel had never suffered. Massacre and torture 
he only knew through books and stories. It is not, he thought, 
a matter of indifference which country even an abstract man 
belongs to. So he remained an Ottoman subject. Two happy 
years in a charming flat in the Avenue Klcber. It really looked 
as though all problems had been solved and his life taken on 
its final definite shape. Gabriel was thirty-five; Juliette^ thirty- 
four; Stephan, thirteen Their lives were untroubled, their 
work intellectual, they had some very pleasant friends. Juliette 
was the decisive factor in choosing them. This was chiefly 
evident in the fact that Gabnel’s former Armeman acquaint- 
ances — ^his parents had been dead some time — came less and 
less frequently to the flat. Juhette, so to speak, insisted re- 
lentlessly on her blood-stream. But she could not manage to, 
change her son’s eyes. Yet Gabriel seemed to notice none of 
all this. An express letter from Avetis Bagradian gave a new 
direction to fate. His elder brother urgently begged Gabriel 
to come to Istanbul. He was a very sick man, he wrote, and 
no longer able to manage the business. So that for some weeks 
he had been making all preliminary arrangements to trans- 
form it into a limited company. Gabriel must be there to 
defend his interests. Juliette, whose habit it was to emphasize 
her knowledge of the world, had announced at once that 
she would hke to accompany Gabriel and back Him up 

7 



throughout the negotiations. Matters of great importance 
would be involved. But he was so simple by nature and cer- 
tainly not up to the Armenian ruses of all the others. June 
1914. An incredible world. Gabriel decided to take not only 
Juhette, but Stephan and Avakian, his tutor. The school year 
was nearly over. This business might prove long drawn out, 
and the ways of the world are unpreictable. In the second 
week of July they had all arrived m Constantinople. 

But, even so, Avetis Bagradian had not been able to await 
them. He had sailed in a small Italian boat for Beirut. The 
state of his lungs had been g[oing from bad to worse in the 
last weeks, with cruel celerity, and he could no longer stand 
the air of Istanbul. (Remarkable that this brother of Gabriel, 
the European, should have chosen Syria, not Switzerland, to 
die in.) So that Gabriel now, instead of dealing with Avetis, 
had to deal with directors and solicitors. Still, he soon per- 
ceived that this unknown brother had watched over his in- 
terests with the greatest tenderness and foresight. For the 
first time he grew intensely conscious of the fact that his ail- 
ing, elderly Avetis had been a worker on his behalf, the brother 
to whom he owed his well-being. What an anomaly that 
brothers should have been such strangers. Gabriel was ap- 
palled at the pride in himself which he had never managed 
to stifle, his scorn of “the Oriental,” the “business man.” Now 
he was seized with the wish — a kind of longing even — to re- 
pair an mjusuce while there was time. The heat in Istanbul 
was really unbearable. It did not seem wise at present to turn 
back westwards. “Let us wait till the storm has blown over.” 
On the other hand the very thought of a short sea voyage was 
a tome. One of the newest boats of the Khcdival Mail would 
touch Beirut on its way to Alexandria, Modern villas were to 
let on the western slopes of Lebanon, of a kind to fulfil 
the most exacting requirements. Connoisseurs know that no 
landscape on earth has greater charms. But Gabriel had need 
of no such persuasions since Juhette agreed at once. In her, 

8 



ior a long ume now, some vague impatience had been ac- 
cumulating. The prospect of something new enticed her. 
While they were sull at sea, declarations of war had come 
rattling down between state and state. When they stood on 
the quay at Beirut, the fighang had already begun in Bel- 
gium, in the Balkans, in Galiaa Impossible now to think of 
going back to France. They stayed where they were. The 
newspapers announced that the Sublime Porte would enter 
into alliance with the Central Powers. Pans had become enemy 
country. 

The real purpose of the journey proved unfulfillable. Avetis 
Bagradian had missed his younger brother a second time. He 
had left Beirut a few days before and undertaken the difficult 
journey, via Aleppo and Antioch, to Yoghonoluk. Even Leb- 
anon did not suffice him to die in. It had to be Musa Dagh. 
But the letter in which his brother foretold his own death did 
not reach Gabriel until the autumn. Meanwhile the Bagradians 
had moved into a pleasant villa only a little way above the 
town. Juliette found life in Beirut possible. There were crowds 
of French people. The various consuls also came to call. Here, 
as everywhere else, she knew how to gather many acquaint- 
ances. Gabriel rejoiced, since exile did not seem to weigh too 
heavily on her. There was nothing to be done against it. Beirut, 
in any case, was safer than European aties. For the moment 
at least. But still Gabriel kept thinking of the house at Yo 
ghonoluk. Avetis, in his letter, had implored him not to neg- 
lect It. Five days after the letter came Dr. Altouni’s telegram, 
announcing his death. And now Gabriel not only thought, but 
constantly spoke of, the house of his childhood. Yet, when 
Juliette suddenly declared that she wanted to move as soon as 
possible into the house in which he had been a little boy and 
had now inherited, the thought scared him. Stubbornly she dis- 
missed his objections. Country solitude? Nothing could be 
more welcome. Out of the world? Uncomfortable? She her- 
self would see to all that. It was just what so attracted her. 


9 



Her parents had owned a country house, in which she had 
grown up. One of her pet dreams had always been to arrange 
a country house of her own, to manage it all en chatelcinc — it 
made not the least difference where, in what country, it hap- 
pened to be. In spite of all tins vivacious eagerness Gabriel 
still opposed her till after the rainy season. Wouldn’t it be far 
more prudent to get his family back to Switzerland? But 
Juliette held to her caprice. She became almost challenging. 
Nor could he repress a strange uneasiness mingled with long- 
ing. It was already December by the time they began to make 
arrangements to return to the house of his fathers. The train 
journey, m spite of the moving troops, was quite bearable as 
far as Aleppo. In Aleppo they hired two indescribable cars. 
Through the thick mud of district roads they arrived, as by a 
miracle, in Antioch. There, at the Orontes bridge, Kristaphor, 
the steward, was awaiting them with the hunting-trap of the 
house and two ox-carts for the luggage. Less than two hours 
on, to Yoghonoluk. They passed hilariously. It hadn’t been half 
bad, declared Juliette. . . . 

“How did I get here!”’ These surface combinations of events 
only seemed to answer the question very imperfectly. Gabriel’s 
solemn amazement still remamed. A vague restlessness vi- 
brated through It. Antediluvian things, buried under twenty- 
three years in Pans, must be re-established in his mind. Only 
now did Gabriel turn his half-seeing eyes away from his 
house. Juliette and Stephan must certainly still be asleep. Nor 
had church bells in Yoghonoluk as yet proclaimed Sunday 
morning. His eyes followed this valley of Armenian villages a 
certain way northwards From where he stood he could still 
see the village of the silkworms, Azir, but Kebussiyc, the last 
village in that direction, had disappeared. Azir lay asleep in 
a dark bed of mulberry trees. Over there, on the little hill 
which nestles against the flank of Musa Dagh, stood the r uins 
of a cloister. Thomas the Apostle, in person, had founded 
that hermitage. The scattered stones bore strange inscriptions. 

lO 



Once Antioch, the regent of the world of those days, had 
extended as far as to the sea. Everywhere the ground was 
strewn with anuques, or they rewarded the first turn of the 
excavator’s spade. Gabriel had already in these few weeks 
gathered a whole collection of valuable trophies inside his 
house. The search for them was his chief occupation here. 
Yet, till now, some reverence had protected him from climb- 
ing the hill of St. Thomas’s rum. (It was guarded by great 
copper-coloured snakes, with crowns on their heads. Those 
who came sacrilegiously pilfermg holy stones to build their 
houses found, as they carried them away, that the stones had 
grown into their backs, and so had to carry the load to the 
grave with them.) Who had told him that story ? Once, in his 
mother’s room (now Juliette’s) old women had sat with 
curiously painted faces. Or was that only an illusion? Was it 
possible — had his mother in Yoghonoluk and his mother in 
Paris been the same? 

Gabriel had long since entered the dark wood. A steep, wide 
gully, which led on up to the summit, had been cut into the 
mountain slope. They called it the ilex ravine. While Bagrad- 
ian was climbing this sheep-track, which forced itself pain- 
fully upwards, through thick undergrowth, he knew sud- 
denly: I have reached the end of the provisional. Something 
deasive is going to happen. 

Provisional? Gabriel Bagradian was an Ottoman officer in 
the reserve of an artillery regiment. The Turkish armies were 
fighting for dear life on four fronts. Against the Russians in 
the Caucasus. Against the English and Indians in Mesopo- 
tamia. Australian divisions had been landed in Gallipoli, to 
force the gates of the Bosporus in conjunction with the Allied 
fleets. The fourth army, in Syria and Palestine, was prepar- 
ing a fresh onslaught on the Suez Canal. It needed super- 
human efforts to keep all these four fronts unbroken. Enver 
Pasha, that deified war-lord, had sacrificed two whole army 


II 



corps to his madly daring campaign in Caucasian snows. No- 
where had the Turks enough officers. Their war material was 
inadequate. 

For Bagradian the hopes of 1908 and 1912 were extinguished. 
Ittihad, the Young Turkish “Qimmittee for Umty and Prog- 
ress,” had only made use of the Armemans, and at once pro- 
ceeded to break every oath. Gabriel had certainly no reason 
to give especial proof of his Turkish patriotism. This time 
things were different in every way. His wife was French. He 
would therefore have to take up arms against a nation he 
loved, to which he owed the deepest gratitude, to which he 
was allied by marriage. None the less he had reported in 
Aleppo at the district headquarters of his former regiment. It 
had been his duty. Any other course would have meant that 
he could be treated as a deserter. But, strangely, the colonel 
in charge had seemed in no need of officers. He had studied 
Bagradian’s papers very closely and sent him away agam. He 
was to give his address and await his orders. That had been 
in November. This was the end of March, and still no orders 
had come from Antioch. Did that hide some impenetrable 
intention or merely the impenetrable chaos of a Turkish mili- 
tary office.^ 

But, in that moment, Gabriel knew for certain that today 
would bring him a decision. On Sundays the post arrived from 
Antioch — not only newspapers and letters, but government 
orders from the Kaimakam to commoners and subjects. 

Gabriel Bagradian was thinkmg solely of his family. The 
position was complicated. What was to happen to Juhette and 
Stephan while he was serving? Gabriel was delighted with 
Juliette’s lemency. But not all her indulgence prevented the 
fact that his wife and son, if they stayed on alone here, would 
be cut off from the rest of the world. 

The ilex grove was behind Bagradian before he had reached 
any further clarity on this point. The stamped-out path led 
northwards, losing itself on the mountain in a tangle at 

12 



arbutus and wild rhododendron. This part of Musa Dagh 
was called the Damlayik by the hill-folk. The two peaks to the 
south rose to about eight hundred metres. The Damlayik did 
not reach any considerable height. These two peaks formed 
the last ridges of the central mass, which then, unexpectedly, 
without regular gradations, fell sheer, as though broken off 
sharp, in huge stony cliifs, into the plain of the Orontes. Here 
in the north, where the wanderer was beginmng to feel his 
way, the Damlayik was lower. Then it fell m a saddle-notch. 
This was the narrowest part of the whole mountainside along 
the coast — ^the waist of Musa Dagh. The plateau at the sum- 
mit narrowed down to a few hundred yards, and the con- 
fusion of rocks on this steeply jutting side was thrust far out. 
Gabriel believed he knew every bush and rock. Of all the 
pictures of his childhood this place had imprinted itself most 
vividly. The same wide umbr^a-pines, forming a grove. The 
same creeping gorse, which struggles over the stony ground. 
Ivy and other clinging plants embrace a circle of white stones, 
which, like the giant members of a senate of nature, break off 
their deliberations the instant an intruder’s step is heard. A 
departing tribe of swallows twitters in the midst of the quiet. 
Excitement ripples the greenish, land-locked sea of air. As of 
leaping trout. The sudden spread and beat of wings is like the 
flicker of many eyelids. 

Gabriel lay down in a grassy place, joining his hands behind 
his head. Twice already he had climbed Musa Dagh in search 
of these pines, these blocks of stone, but had lost his way. So 
they don’t really exist, had been his thought. Now he closed 
tired eyes. When a human being comes back to any former 
place of contemplation and inner life, those spirits which he, 
the returned, once cherished and left there return and eagerly 
possess him. The ghosts of Bagradian’s childhood rushed 
upon him, as though for twenty-three years they had waited 
feithfully under pines and rocks, in tins charming wilderness, 
for him to return. They are warhke ghosts. The mad dreams 

13 



o£ every Armenian boy. (G>uld they be otherwise?) . . . 
Abdul Hamid, the blood-stained Sultan, had issued a ferman 
against Christians. The hounds of the Prophet, Turks, Kurds, 
Circassians, rally to the green banners, to burn and plunder, 
to massacre Armenian folk. But they had reckoned without 
Gabriel Bagradian. He assembles his own. He leads them into 
the mountains. With indescribable valour he fights off this 
overwhelming power and beats it back. 

Gabriel could not shake oS these childish fantasies. He, the 
Parisian, Juliette’s husband, the savant, the officer minded to 
do his duty as a Turkish subject, and who knew the realities 
of modern warfare, was also, simultaneously, a boy who with 
primitive blood-hate flung himself on the arch-enemy of his 
race. The dream of every Armenian boy. To be sure it only 
lasted an instant. But Gabriel marvelled and smiled iromcally 
before failing asleep. 

Bagradian started up with a certain fear. Someone had 
watched him closely as he slept. Apparently he had been 
asleep some time. He looked up, into the quietly glowing 
eyes of Stephan, his son. Some distinctly unpleasant, even if 
vague, sensation invaded him. It is not for a son to come upon 
his father as he sleeps. Some profound law of custom had 
violated. His voice was rather sharp as he asked: “What are 
you doing here? Where’s Monsieur Avakian?’’ 

Now Stephan, too, seemed embarrassed at having found lus 
father asleep. He did not quite know what to do with his 
hands. His full bps opened. He was wearing schoolboy clothes, 
a Norfolk jacket, short stockings, a wide collar out over the 
coat. He tugged at his jacket as he answered: “Maman said 
1 could go for a walk by myself. This is Monsieur Avakian’s 
free day. We don’t do any work on Sundays.’’ 

“We’re not in France now, but in Syria, Stephan,” his father 
somewhat ominously explained. “Next time you mustn’t come 
straying about the hills alone.” 



Stephan eyed his father eagerly, as though in addition to 
this mild scolding he were expecting more important direc- 
tions. But Gabrid said no more. An absurd embarrassment 
had possession of him. He felt as though this were the first 
time he had ever been alone with his son. He had not taken 
very much notice of him since their arrival here in Yoghono- 
luk and had usually only seen him at meals. True that in 
Paris or in the holidays in Switzerland he had often taken 
Stephan for walks. But is one ever alone in Parish In Mon- 
treux, or Chamonix? In any case the limpid air of Musa Dagh 
contained a releasing element which seemed to bring them 
dose together, in a proximity neither had ever known. Gabriel 
went onwards like a guide, familiar with all the important 
landmarks. Stephan came after, still expectantly silent. 

Father and son in the East* Their relationship can scarcely 
be compared with the superficial contact of European parents 
and children. Whoso sees his father secs God. For that father 
1$ the last link in a long, unbroken chain of ancestors, binding 
all men to Adam, and hence to the origin of creation. And yet 
whoso sees his son sees God. For this son is the next link, 
binding humans to the Last Judgment, the end of all things, 
the consummation. Must not so holy a relationship be timid 
and sparing of words? 

This father, as beseemed him, gave a serious turn to the 
conversation: “What subjects is Monsieur Avakian teaching 
you now?” 

“We started reading Greek a httle while ago. Father. And 
we do physics, history, and geography." 

Bagradian raised his head. Stephan had said it in Armenian. 
But had he asked his question in Armenian? Usually they 
spoke French to one another. His son’s Armenian words 
stirred the father strangely. He was conscious that in Stephan 
he had far more often seen a French than an Armenian boy. 

“Geography?” he repeated. “And what continent are you 
on now?” 


15 



“Asia Minor and Syria,” Stephan rather zealously an- 
nounced. 

Gabriel nodded approval, as though it was the best thing 
he could have said. Then, still a httle absent-minded, he tried 
to round of{ their talk pedagogically: “Think you could draw 
a map of Musa Dagh?” 

Stephan was pleased at so much paternal confidence. “Oh, 
yes, Dad. In your room there’s one of Uncle Avetis’s maps, 
you know. Antioch and the coast. You’ve only got to enlarge 
the scale and put in all that they leave out.” 

Quite right. For an instant Gabriel rejoiced in Stephan’s in- 
telligence. But then his thoughts strayed back to marching- 
orders, perhaps already on their way, or perhaps still buried 
on a Turkish office desk in Aleppo, in Istanbul even. A silent 
digression. 

Stephan’s expectant soul awaited another remark. This is 
Dad’s country. He longed to be told stories of Dad’s child- 
hood, that secret tune, of which they had so seldom told him 
anything. His father seemed to make for a definite point. And 
already they were near that peculiar terrace he had in mmd. 
It extended, jutting straight out from the mountain, into a 
void. A mighty arm of rock upheld it on spread fingers, like 
a dish. It IS a flat spur of gramte strewn with stones, so wide 
that two houses could have been built on it. Sea storms, to be 
sure, which have here free play, scarcely tolerate a few shrubs 
on this rock, and a clump of Mexican grass, tough as leather. 
This overhanging, freely jutting terrace springs so far out that 
any suicide who had plunged to destrucuon from its edge 
into salt water, twelve hundred feet beneath, could have van- 
ished unwounded by any rock. Young Stephan tried, of course, 
to run to the edge. His father pulled him sharply back and 
held his hand clasped very tight. His free right hand pointed 
out the four quarters of the globe. 

“There to the north we co^d see the Gulf of Alexandretta 
if Ras el-Khanzir, the Swine cape, weren’t in the way. And 

i6 



south there’s the mouth of the Orontes, but the mountain takes 
a curve. . . 

Stephan attentively followed the movements of his father’s 
forefinger as it traced its half-circle of rufSed sea. But what 
he asked had nothing to do with the geography of Musa 
Dagh. “Dad — ^wiU you really go to the war?” 

Gabriel did not even notice that he was still keeping tight 
hold of Stephan’s hand. “Yes. I expect my orders any day.” 

“Have you got to?” 

“Must, Stephan. All Turkish reserve officers are being called 

Up. 

“But we aren’t Turks. And why didn’t they call you up at 
once?” 

“They say the artillery hasn’t enough big guns at present. 
When the new batteries are set up, they’ll bt calling all the 
reservist officers.” 

“And where’ll they send you?” 

“I belong to the fourth army, in Syria and Palcsune.” 

It consoled Bagradian to think that he might be sent for a 
certain time to Aleppo, Damascus, or Jerusalem. Perhaps there 
would be a chance of taking Juliette and Stephan. Stephan 
seemed to divine these fatherly cares. 

“And what about us, Dad?” 

“That’s just It. . . .” 

The boy fervently interrupted: “Leave us here. Dad— please 
leave us here. Maman likes our house as much as I do.” 
Stephan was trying to paafy his father as to Maman’s feelings 
here in a foreign country. His delicate alertness was well aware 
of the two opposing currents in their marriage. 

But Bagradian reflected. “It would be best if I tried to send 
you both to Switzerland, via Istanbul. But unluckily that’s 
also in the war zone.” 

Stephan clenched his fists across his heart. “No — not to Swit' 
ierland. Do let’s stay, Dadl” 

Gabriel looked at the pleading eyes of his son in some aston* 

17 



ishment. Mysterious! That this boy, who never had known 
his father’s home, should feel, none the less, so deeply bound 
to it. This emotion had lived m hin), this afBnity with the 
mountain of the Bagradians; Stephan, born in Pans, bad in- 
herited it with his very blood. He put his arm round the boy’s 
shoulder, but only said: “We’ll see.” 

When they got back to the flat plateau of the Damlayik, 
morning sounds from Yoghonoluk assailed them. It did not 
take more than another hour to reach the valley. They had to 
hurry to be in time for at least the second half of mass. 

In Azir, the silkworm village, the Bagradians only met a 
few people, who passed them with morning greetings: “Bari 
luis” — “Good light.” The inhabitants of Azir usually went to 
church in Yoghonoluk. In front of many houses there were 
tables with wide boards laid out on them. The silkworms’ 
eggs were spread upon these boards, whitish masses hatching 
in the sun. Stephan learned from hi* father that old Avetts 
had been the son of a silk-spinner and had begun his career 
very early, at fifteen, by going to Baghdad to buy spawn. 

Midway to Yoghonoluk the old gendarme. All Nassif, 
passed them. That worthy saptich was one of the ten Turks 
who for many years had lived among the Armenians in these 
villages in peace and amity with them. Besides himself, the 
only Turks worth mentiomng here were the five gendarmes 
at his orders, composing his gendarmerie post. They were 
often changed, but he remained, as firm as Musa Dagh itself. 
The only other representative of Ottoman authority was the 
deformed postman, who lived here with his family and on 
Wednesdays and Sundays brought the post in from Antioch. 

Today All Nassif looked worried. This scrubby functionary 
of the Sublime Porte seemed to be m a very great hurry. His 
pock-marked face glistened with perspiration under his Turk- 
ish cap. His martial cavalry sword kept clattering against his 
bowed legs. Usually the sight of Bagradian Efiendi was 
enough to make him turn a reverent face; today he only 



saluted stiffly, though even his salute had a worried look. This 
change of manner struck Gabriel so, that for some minutes he 
stood looking after him. 

A few stragglers were still hastemng over the square be- 
fore the church of Yoghonoluk — the latc<omcrs who lived a 
long way off. Women in gaily patterned head-scarves and 
puffed-out coats. Men wearing the shalwar, in baggy trousers, 
and over these the entari, a kmd of gaberdine. Their faces all 
looked serious and withdrawn. This sun had already the 
power of summer in it; the chalk-white houses glittered 
harshly. Most were single-storied and freshly daubed: Ter 
Haigasun’s presbytery, the doctor’s house, the apothecary, the 
big council-house, owned by the chief of Yoghonoluk’s no- 
tables, that rich mukhtar Thomas Kebussyan. The Church of 
the Ever-Increasing Angelic Powers was built on a wide pedi- 
ment. Unbalustercd steps led up to its portals. Avetis Ba- 
gradian, its donor, had copied on a smaller scale a certain 
famous nauonal edifice in the Caucasus. The voices of the 
choir, singing mass, flowed out through its open doorways. 
Away, beyond the dense congregation, the altar, pale with lit 
tapers, shone in the gloom. The gold cross gleamed on the 
back of Ter Haigasun’s red vestment. 

Gabriel and Stephan went up the steps. Samuel Avakian, 
Stephan’s tutor, met them. He had been waiting impatiently. 

“Go along in, Stephan,” he ordered his pupil. “Your mother’s 
waiting for you.” 

Then, when Stephan had vamshed through the buzzing 
congregation, he turned quiedy to his employer. “I only 
wanted to tell you that they’ve been here, asking for your 
passports. Travelling passport and passport for the interior. 
Three officials came from Antioch.” 

Gabriel glanced sharply at the student’s face. He had hved 
for some years as one of the family. It was the face of an 
Armenian intellectual. A rather sloping forehead. Watchful, 
deeply troubled eyes bchmd glasses. An expression of eternal 

19 



surrender to fate, but at the same time a sharp look of being 
on guard, ready every second to parry an attacker’s blow. 
Only after a few instants’ concentrated study of that face did 
Bagradian ask: “And what have you done?” 

“Madame gave the officials all they wanted.” 

“Even the passport for the interior?” 

“Yes, foreign passport and teskere.” 

Gabriel turned back down the church steps to light a ciga- 
rette. He drew a few deeply reflective puffs. The passport for 
the interior is a document which gives its possessor freedom to 
move as he pleases over the length and breadth of the Ottoman 
empire. In theory, without this scrap of paper a subject of 
the Sultan has no right to move from his village into the next. 
Gabriel threw away his cigarette and straightened his shoul- 
ders with a jerk. “It only means that today or tomorrow I 
shall have to join my battery in Aleppo.” 

Avakian stood looking down at a deeply sunken wheel-rut, 
left by the last rams in the loam of the church square. “I 
don’t think it means your marching orders for Aleppo, 
Effendi.” 

“It can’t mean anything else." 

Avakian’s voice had become very quiet. “They made me 
give them mine, as well.” 

Bagradian, who had begun to laugh, checked himself. “That 
only means you’ll have to go to Aleppo to be medically exam- 
ined, my dear Avakian. This time it isn’t a joke. But don’t 
you worry. We’ll manage the mihtary tax again for you, all 
right. I need you for Stephan.” 

Still Avakian did not raise his eyes from the wheel-rut. “Dr. 
Altouni, Apothecary Krikor, and Pastor Nokhudian certainly 
aren’t of military age, though I may be. They’ve all had their 
tesker& taken away from them.” 

“Are you certain of that?” Gabriel was beginning to lose 
his temper. “Who demanded them? What sort of officials? 
What grounds did they state? And where are these gentry, 

20 



that’s the main thing? I fed very much inclined to have a 
word with them.” 

He learned that it was nearly half an hour since the odiciais, 
escorted by mounted gendarmes, had vanished in the direc- 
tion of Suedia. Judging by their demands it could only be a 
question of village notables, since the common craftsman and 
peasant owns no tesker^ but at most a written permission from 
the market in Antioch. 

Gabriel took a few long strides to and fro, no longer notic- 
ing the tutor. At last he said to him: “Go on into church, 
Avakian. I’ll follow you.” 

But he did not so much as think of hearing the rest of the 
mass, whose many-voiced choral that same instant came out 
to him in an especially loud burst of devotion. His head was on 
one side, sharply reflective, as he wandered back across the 
square, walked a little way down the village street, and left 
it where the road forked to the villa. Without even entering 
the house, he stopped at the stables to tell them to saddle one 
of his horses, which had once been the pride of Avetis, his 
brother. Unluckily no Kristaphor was there to accompany 
him So he took a stable-boy. He had not yet made up his 
mind what to do. 

But an hour’s quick riding would get him to Antioch. 



2 


Konak — Hamam — Selamlik 

The Hukumct of Antioch, as the government konak of the 
Kaimakam was often called, stood under the hill of the citadel. 
A drab but extensive building, since the Kazah Antakiya is 
one of the most extensive Syrian provinces. 

Gabriel Bagradian, who had left his boy with the horses at 
the Orontes bridge, had already waited some time in the big 
central office of the konak. He hoped to be received by the 
Kaimakam himself, to whom he had sent in his card. 

A Turkish government office like all the others Gabriel 
knew so well; on the mottled wall, from which plaster was 
crumbling, a clumsy portrait of the Sultan and a couple of say> 
ings from the Koran. Nearly every window-pane had been 
cracked and repaired with oil paper. The filthy deal floor 
strewn with gobbets of spittle and cigarette-ends. Some minor 
official sat behind an empty desk, sucking his teeth and gazing 
out into space. An unopposed legion of portly flies were en- 
gaged in a fierce, disgusting concert. Low benches ran round 
the walls. A few people were waiting — Turkish and Arab 
peasants. One, not too squeamish, squatted on the floor, spread- 
mg his long garments out around him, as though he could 
not embrace enough of its filth. A sour aroma hke that of 
Russia leather, made up of sweat, stale tobacco, sloth, and 
poverty, infested the room. Gabriel knew that the district 
head oflices of the various peoples had each its distinctive 
smell. But this stink of fear and kismet was common to all of 


32 



them— of little people receiving the impact of the state as a 
natural and monstrous force. 

At last the gaudily patterned doorkeeper conducted him 
negligently into a small room, differing from the other by its 
rugs, its intact window-panes, its desk, thickly strewn with 
documents, its attempt at cleanliness. The walls displayed no 
portrait of the Sultan, but a huge photograph of Enver Pasha 
on horseback. Gabriel found himself facing a young man, 
with reddish hair, freckles, a small, mihtary moustache. This 
was not the Kaimakam, only a mudir in charge of the coastal 
district, the nahiyeh of Suedia. The most noticeable thmg 
about the mudir were his long, scrupulously manicured finger- 
nails. He was wearing a grey suit, which seemed a litde too 
tight even for his measly person; with it a red tie and 
canary-yellow lace-up boots. Bagradian knew at once — Salon- 
ika! He had no reason for knowing it except the young man’s 
outward appearance. Salonika had been the birthplace of the 
Turkish nauonalist movement, of frantic Westernization, 
boundless reverence of Western progress in all its forms. 
Doubtless this mudir was a hanger-on, perhaps even a member 
of Ittihad, that secretive "Comtte Pour I’umon et le progres" 
which today held unimpeded dominion over the Caliph’s state. 
He was excessively pohte to his visitor. He got up and himself 
brought the chair to the desk. Most of the time his red- 
nmmed eyes, with the sparse lashes of red-haired people, 
looked past Bagradian. 

Gabriel rather stressed his name. The mudir nodded, almost 
imperceptibly. “The highly esteemed Bagradian family is 
known to us.” 

It cannot be denied that his tone and words produced a 
certain glow of satisfaction in Gabriel, whose voice became 
more assured. “Today certain citizens of my village — I was 
among them — have had our passports taken away. Is that 
official? Did you know of it?” 

After long reflection and fumbling among documents, the 

23 



miidir announced that, with all the press of official business, 
he found it impossible to put his hand on every trifle directly. 
At last hght dawned. “Oh, yes, of course. The passports for 
the interior. That’s not an independent ruhng of the kazah — 
it’s a new order from His Excellency the Minister of the 
Interior.’’ 

Now at last he had found the crumpled sheet, which he 
spread in front of him. He seemed willing, on request, to 
read the full text of this decree of His Excellency Taalat Bey. 
Gabriel asked if the order were to be generally applied. The 
answer sounded rather evasive. The mass of people would 
scarcely be affected by it, since usually only the richer shop- 
keepers, merchants, and such like owned a pass for the interior. 

Gabriel stared at the long finger-nails. “I’ve lived most of 
my life abroad, in Paris ” 

Again the official slighdy inclined his head. “We know 
that, Effendi.” 

“And so I’m not very used to these deprivations of liberty." 

The mudir smiled an indulgent smile. “You over-rate the 
matter, Effcndi. This is war-time. And nowadays even Ger- 
man, French, and English citizens find they have to submit 
to a great deal to which they used not to be accustomed. All 
over Europe it’s much the same as it is here. May I also re- 
mind you that this is the war zone of the fourth army, and 
therefore a military area ? It’s absolutely essential to keep some 
control of people’s movements.” 

These reasons sounded so cogent that Gabriel Bagradian 
felt relieved. That morning’s event, which had brought him 
to Antioch, suddenly seemed to lose its astringent quahty. He 
had been hearing rumours everywhere of traitors, deserters, 
spies. The state had to protect itself. Impossible to judge such 
measures as this by the hole-and-corner methods of Yogho- 
noluk. And the mudir’s further observations were of a kmd 
to allay Armeman mistrust. The Minister had, to be sure, 
withdrawn all passports, but this did not mean that, in certain 

34 



cases, new ones might not be procurable. The vilayet office 
in Aleppo was the competent authority for these. Bagradian 
Effendi must know himself that the Wali, Djelal Bey, was 
the most just and benevolent governor of the whole empire. 
A request, backed by recommendations from these offices, 
would be sent to Aleppo. . . . The mudir broke off: “Unless 
I’m mistaken, Effendi, you’re hable for military service.” 

Gabriel gave a short account of the matter. Yesterday, per- 
haps, he might still have asked the official to find out why no 
marching-orders had reached him. But the last few hours had 
altered everything. The thought of war — of Juliette and 
Stephan — oppressed him. His sense of duty as a Turkish 
officer had evaporated. He hoped now that the battery in 
Aleppo had forgotten him and he felt no desire to attract atten- 
tion. But it struck him how well informed these Antioch 
officials seemed to be, of all that concerned him. 

The mudir’s red-rimmcd eyes transmitted his satisfaction. 
“So that now, Effendi, you arc, so to speak, a soldier on leave. 
So, for you, there can be no question of any teskerd.” 

“But my wife and son ... 

As he said this (it seemed to mystify the mudir), Gabriel 
felt for the first time: “We’re in a trap. . . .” 

That same instant the double doors into the next office were 
pushed open. There entered two gentlemen. One was an 
elderly officer; the other, doubtless, the Kaimakam. This 
provincial governor was a big, puffy-looking man, in a grey, 
crumpled frock<oat. Heavy, dark-brown pouches under the 
eyes, in the sallow face of a dyspeptic. Bagradian and the 
mudir rose. The Kaimakam paid not the least attention to the 
Armenian. In a low voice he gave some directions to his 
subordinate, raised a hand carelessly to his fez, and, followed 
by the major, walked out of the office, since he seemed to 
have finished his day’s work. 

Gabriel stared at the door. "Are you making distmctions be- 
tween officers, then?” 


25 



The mudir had begun to tidy his desk. "I don’t quite know 
what you mean, Eilendi.” 

“I meant, are Turks and Armenians to be given separate 
treatment?” 

This seemed to horrify the mudir. “Every Ottoman subject 
is equal before the law.” 

That, he continued, had been the most important achieve- 
ment of the revolution of 1908. That certain habits of pre- 
revolutionary days should still persist— as for instance the 
preferential treatment of Ottomans in military and govern- 
ment offices — that was one of the things that could never be 
altered by act of parliament. Peoples did not change as quickly 
as did their constitutions, and reforms were far easier on paper 
than in reality. He concluded his excursion into poliucal 
theory: “The war will bring a great many important changes.” 

Gabriel took this for a hopeful prophecy. But the mudir 
suddenly jerked his freckled face, which, for no apparent 
reason, was twitching with hate. 

“Meanwhile let us hope that n6 incidents will force the 
government to relentless severity with certain sections of the 
populace.” 

When Gabriel Bagradian turned into the bazaar at Antioch, 
he had made up his mind on two points. If they called 
him up, he would not shrink from any sacrifice to buy 
himself clear of the army. And he would await the end of the 
war in the peace and quiet of his house at Yoghonoluk, un- 
molested and unperceived. Surely, since this was the spring of 
1915, it could only be a few months before peace was signed. 
He reckoned on September or October. Surely none of the 
Powers would dare another winter campaign. Till peace he 
would have to make the best of things and then— back to Paris, 
as fast as possible. 

The bazaar bore him along. That deep surge which knows 
none of the ebb and flow, the hurry, of a crowd along a Euro- 

26 



pean pavement, which rolls on with an irresistible, even 
motion, as time flows on into eternity. He might not have been 
in this God-forsaken provincial hole^ Antakiya, but transported 
to Aleppo or Damascus, so inexhaustibly did the two opposing 
streams of the bazaar surge past each other. Turks in Euro- 
pean dress, wearing the fez, with stand-up collars and walking- 
sticks, officials or merchants. Armenians, Greeks, Syrians, these 
too in European dress, but with different headgear. In and out 
among them, Kurds and Circassians in their tribal garb. Most 
displayed weapons. For the government, which in the case of 
Christian peoples viewed every pocket-knife with mistrust, 
tolerated the latest infantry rifles in the hands of these restless 
mountaineers; it even supplied them. Arab peasants, in from 
the neighbourhood. Also a few bedouins from the south, in 
long, many-folded cloaks, desert-hued, in picturesque tarbushes, 
the silken fringes of which hung over their shoulders. Women 
in charshafFcs, the modest attire of female Moslems. But then, 
too, the unveiled, the emancipated, in frocks that left free silk- 
stockinged legs. Here and there, in this stream of human be- 
ings, a donkey, under a heavy load, the hopeless proletarian 
among beasts. To Gabriel it seemed always the same donkey 
which came stumbling past him in a coma, with the same 
ragged fellow tugging his bridle. But this whole world, men, 
women, Turks, Arabs, Armenians, Kurds, with trench-brown 
soldiers in its midst — ^its goats, its donkeys — was smelted to- , 
gether into an indescribable unity by its gait— a long stride, 
slow and undulating, moving onwards irresistibly, to a goal 
not to be determined. 

And Gabriel smelt the savours of his childhood. The whifif 
of seething oil of sesame, which came in sharp gusts across 
the street through crevices in the herbalists’ vats, the onion- 
laden reek of mutton fricassees, simmering over open fires. 
The stench of rotting vegetables. And of humanity, more 
noisome than all the rest, which slept in the clothes it wore by 
day. 


27 



He recognized the yearning cries of the street-venders; Ja 
rezzah, ja kerim, ja fettah, ja alim — so the boy who offered for 
sale his rings of white bread from a basket still chanted senti- 
mentally. — ^“O All-Nourishcr, O All-Good, O All-Provident, 
O Knower of all things.” The ancient cry of the ages still prof- 
fered fresh dates — “Thou brown one, O brown of the desert, 
O maiden.” The salad-vender retained his throaty conviction: 
“Ed daim Allah, Allah ed daim” — that the Everlasting alone 
was God, that God alone was the Everlasting — some consola- 
tion, in view of his wares, to the purchaser. Gabriel bought a 
berazik, a little cake spread with grape syrup. This “food for 
swallows" also brought its memories of childhood. But the first 
bite of it turned his stomach, and he gave the sweetmeat to a 
youngster who had stood in rapture, eyeing his mouth. 

His heart sank so, that for an instant he had to close his eyes. 
What could have happened to change the world so com- 
pletely? Here, in this country, he had been born. Surely he 
ought to feel at home here. But— the irresistible, evenly moving 
crowd in the bazaar seemed to put his home at enmity with 
him. And that young mudir ? Surely he had been scrupulously 
pohte. . . “The highly esteemed Bagradian family . . .” Yet 
in a flash Gabriel knew for a certainty that this suavity and 
its “highly esteemed family” had been no more than a single 
piece of insolence. It had been worse — ^hate masked as courtesy. 
This same hate flowed around him here. It seared his skin, 
galled his back. And indeed his back was suddenly panic- 
stricken, with the panic of a man hunted by enemies, without 
a soul to befriend him in the world. In Yoghonoluk, apart, in 
the big house, he had known nothing of all that. And before 
in Paris? There, in spite of all his prosperity, he had lived in 
the cool spaces surrounding aliens, who strike root anywhere. 
Had he struck root here? Here for the first time, m this mean 
bazaar, at home, he could measure fully the absolute degree 
of his alien state upon this earth. Armenian! In him an 
ancient blood-stream, an ancient people. But why did his 

28 



thoughts more often speak French than Armenian — as for in- 
stance now? (And yet that morning he had felt a distinct 
thrill of pleasure when his son answered him in Armenian.) 
Blood-stream, and people. To be honourable. Were not these 
mere empty concepts? Human beings in every age have 
strewn the bitter bread of existence with a different spice of 
ideas, only to make it still more unpalatable. A side-alley of 
the bazaar came into view. Most of its venders were Arme- 
nian^ standing before their shops and booths: money- 
changers, carpet-sellers, jewellers. So these were his brothers, 
then? These battered faces, these ghstening eyes, alert for 
custom? No, many thanks, he refused such brotherhood, every- 
thing in him rebelled against iti But had old Avetis Bagradian 
been anything other, or better, than such as these? — even 
though he were more far-sighted, gifted, energetic. And had 
he not his grandfather alone to thank that he was not forced 
to live as they? He went on, shuddering with repugnance. 
Then he was suddenly conscious of the fact that one or the 
great difficulties of his hfe sprang from the circumstance that 
nowadays he saw so much through Juhettc’s eyes. So that not 
only in the world was he an ahen, but within himself, the 
instant he came mto contact with other people. Jesus Christ! 
Couldn’t one be an individual, free from all this seething, 
stinking hosulity, as one had that morning on Musa Dagh? 

Nothing more unnerving than such a test of one’s rcahty. 
Gabriel fled from the Usun Charshy, the Long Market, as the 
Turks called the bazaar. He could no longer endure its hos- 
tile rhythm. He found himself in a httle square, composed of 
new buildings. A pleasant-looking house leapt to his eyes, 
hamam, the steam-bath, arranged, as everywhere in Turkey, 
with a certain luxury. It was still too early to call on the old 
Agha Rifaat Berekct. And, since he felt no inclination to go 
into one of the dubious restaurants, he turned into the bath. 

He spent twenty minutes in the big steam-room amid 
slowly mounting vapours, which not only made the other 

29 



bathers look like far-off ghosts, but seemed evea to divorce 
him from his own body. It was a kind of minor death. He 
could fed this day’s impenetrable significance. 

In the cooling-room next door he lay down on one of the 
bare couches to submit to the usual treatment after a bath. 
Now he fdt more naked than he had before in the steam. 
An attendant hurled himself upon him and began, according 
to all the rules of his art (which truly is one), to knead his 
flesh. With resonant smackings he played on Gabriel’s rump as 
on cymbals, humming and pantmg as he did it. A few 
Turkish beys, on the other pdlets, were undergoing similar 
treatment. They surrendered to it with gasps of dolorous 
pleasure. At intervals, interrupted by grunts of pain, their 
voices talked in broken phrases through the angry zeal of the 
masseurs. Gabriel had at first no wish to listen. But, mingled 
with the hummings of his torturer, their voices assailed him 
inescapably. They sounded so individual, so sharply distin- 
guished from one another, that he felt as though he could 
see them. 

The first, a well-fed bass. No doubt a very self-assured gentle- 
man, to whom it was highly important to know the ms and 
outs of everything — ^if possible, even before the officials con- 
cerned. This man of information had secret sources. “The 
English sent him in a torpedo-boat, from Cyprus to the coast. 
. . . That was near Oshalki. . . . The fellow brought money 
and arms and v/as seven days nosing about the village. . . . 
Of course, the saptiehs didn’t know anything. ... I can 
even give you the names . . . Koshkerian is the name of the 
unclean swine.” 

The second voice, high and flurried. An elderly, peaceable 
httlc gent, who always did his best to be optimistic. ’The voice 
seemed somehow not so tall as the other, as though it were 
looking up at it. Its interjections of pleasurable pain were 
framed to an august verse of the Koran: “La ilah ila ’Hah. 
. . . God is great. . . . We can’t have that sort of thing. . . . 

30 



But it may not be true ... la ilah ila ’Uah . . . one hears all 
kinds of things . . . This is probably only a rumour.” 

The well-fed bass, contemptuously: “I have very serious let- 
ters from a highly placed personage ... a close friend.” 

Third voice. That of a strident amateur politician, who 
seemed to find it highly satisfactory that things in the world 
should be so unsettled. “We can’t let it go on much longer. 
. . . We shall have to finish it. . . . What’s the government 
diere for.? What about Ituhad? . . . The unfortunate thing 
is this conscription. . . . We’ve even armed the curs. . . . 
Now, how do you think we’ll be able to deal with them? 
. . . The war . . . For weeks I’ve shouted myself hoarse.” 

Fourth voice, heavy with the cares of state: “And Zeitun?” 

The peaceable voice: “Zeitun? Why, what do you mean? 
. . . Good heavens. . . . What’s been happening in Zeitun?” 

The politician, ominously: “In Zeitun? . . , Why, the 
news has been posted up in every reading-room of the 
Hukumet. . . . Anyone can convince hunself . . .” 

The informative bass: “The reading-rooms established 
everywhere by the German consulates . . 

A fifth voice, interrupting from the farthest pallet: “We 
ourselves established them.” 

An indistinct tangle of obscure allusions: “Koshkerian — 
Zeitun . . . We’ve got to finish it . . .” 

But Gabriel understood, without knowing the details. A» 
the bath attendant dug his two fists into his shoulders, these 
Turkish voices roared in his ears like water. Acute shame. 
He who a short time ago had passed the Armenian shop 
keepers in the bazaar with such a shiver of repugnance felt 
himself now to be involved, answerable for the destiny of his 
people. 

Meanwhile the bather farthest away from him had heaved 
himself, groaning, off his pallet. He gathered up his burnous, 
which served as a bath-gown, and, on toddhng feet, ambled a 
few steps about the room. Gabriel could see only that he was 

31 



tall and stout. His consequential way of speech, the respect 
with which they heard him out, made Gabriel conclude that 
this was a very wealthy man. 

“People are unjust to the government. Impatience alone 
does not suffice to determine policy. The true state of afEairs 
is very difFerent to what the uninformed masses suppose it to 
be. Treaties, capitulations, considerations of all kinds, foreign 
opinion. . . . But let me assure the beys in confidence that 
orders have just been issued by the War Office, by His Excel- 
lency Enver Pasha in person to the district mihtary authorities, 
to disarm melun ermeni millet (the treacherous Armenian 
race) — that is to say, to recall Armenians from the firing-line 
and degrade them to the basest tasks — road-making, carry- 
ing loads. . . . Such is the truth. . . . But it must not be 
mentioned.” 

“I can’t let it pass. I won’t swallow that,” Gabriel said to 
himself. Another voice warned him quietly: “You yourself 
are the persecuted.” But some dark force, which drew him up 
from the pallet, decided the struggle. He pushed the attendant 
to one side and sprang on to the tiles. He tied the white 
towel around his loins. His face aglow with rage, his hair 
disordered from the bath, his broad chest, seemed not to be- 
long to the gentleman who, that morning, had worn tourist’s 
tweeds. He planted himself squarely before the rich man. 
Suddenly, by the dark bags under the eyes, the liverish face, 
he knew the Kaimakam. The sight only served to increase his 
fury. 

“His Excellency Enver Pasha and his whole staff had their 
lives saved in the Caucasus by Armenian troops. He was as 
good as taken prisoner by the Russians. You know that as 
well as I do, Effiendi. You also know that His Excellency, in 
a letter to the Catholicos of Sis, or to the Bishop of Conia, 
praised the valour of sadika ermeni millet (the loyal Armenian 
people). This letter was posted up by government order. That 
is the truth. And whosoever poisons that truth by spreading 

32 



rumours is weakening the conduct of the war, destroying 
our unity, is an enemy of the empire, a traitor. I, Gabriel 
Bagradian, tell you this, an officer m the Turkish army.” 

He stopped, and waited for the answer. But the beys, non- 
plussed by this wild outburst, did not utter a word — ^not even 
the Kaimakam, who only drew his burnous more tightly 
around his nakedness. So that Gabriel could get out of the 
bath victorious, although still shaking with excitement. As he 
dressed, he was already aware that this was the stupidest thing 
he had ever done. Now the way to Antioch was barred. And 
it was the only way in, or out, of the world. He ought, before 
offending the Kaimakam, to have considered Juliette and 
Stephan. Yet he could not altogether reproach himself. 

His heart was still beating fast as the Agha Rifaat Bereket’s 
servant conducted him into the selamlik, the reception-room 
of this cool Turkish house. Gabriel walked up and down 
over wide vistas of carpet lost m the gloom. His watch, which, 
idiotically, he still kept set to European time, pointed to the 
second hour of the afternoon. It was, therefore, the sacred 
domesuc hour, the hour of kef, the never-to-be-cncroachcd-on 
midday peace, in which every visit was a very serious piece of 
tactlessness. He had got here far too early. And the Agha, a 
stickler for the forms of old-Turkish etiquette, allowed him to 
wait. 

Bagradian walked to and fro, from one end to the other of 
this almost empty apartment, in which, besides two long 
divans, there were only braziers and a htde table for cups. He 
jusufied his discourtesy to himself. — There’s something brew- 
ing, I don’t quite know what it is, but 1 haven’t a minute to 
waste till I get it clear. — ^Rifaat Bereket had been a friend of 
the house of Bagradian from its origins, even in the palmy 
days of old Aveds. Some of Gabriel’s pleasantest, most re- 
spectful memories centred upon him. He had called on him 
twice since coming to stay in Yoghonoluk. The Agha had 

33 



not only helped him to make purchases, but frmn time to time 
would send him agents with offers, at absurdly low prices, o£ 
rare finds for his collection of antiques. 

The master of the house, who entered noiselessly on thin 
slippers made of goatskin, found Gabriel talking to himself. 
The Agha Rifaat Bereket, over seventy, with a white goat- 
beard and thin features, half-shut eyes, and small, shimmering 
hands, wore a yellow scarf around his fez. It was the emblem 
of the Moslem who performs his rchgious duties more exaedy 
and regularly than the many. This old man’s httle hands 
waved in ceremonious welcome; they touched his heart, his 
mouth, his forehead. Gabriel was equally ceremonious. No 
impatience would have seemed to tighten his nerves. The 
Agha came nearer and stretched forth his right hand towards 
his visitor’s heart, so that his finger-tips just rested on Ga- 
briel’s chest. This was the “heart-felt contact,’’ the closest form 
of personal sympathy and mysdc usage, which pious men of 
a certain order of dervishes have adopted. The small white 
hand gleamed whiter still in the pleasant twilight of the 
selamlik. Gabriel fancied this hand a face, even perhaps more 
sensitive and delicate than the actual one. 

“Friend, and son of my friend’’ — the long-drawn emphasis 
of this was still a part of the ceremony of welcome — “your 
visiting-card has already come to me as a pleasantly unex- 
pected gift. Now your presence itself brightens the day for 
me.’’ Gabriel, who knew his manners, found the right for- 
mula for reply. 

“My deceased parents very soon left me alone. But in you I 
find a living witness of their memory and fond atta chment . 
How happy am I to possess in you a second father.’’ 

“I am in your debt.” The old man led his guest to the 
divan. “Today you honour me for the third time. It has long 
been my undischarged duty to await you as a visitor in your 
house. But you see in me an old and infirm man. The ro^ to 
Yoghonoluk is bad and long. And, besides, a long and urgent 

34 



journey lies before me for which 1 must spare my limbs. For- 
give me^ therefore.” 

This ended the ritual of reception. They sat down. A bc^ 
brought coffee and cigarettes. They sipp^ and smoked in 
silence. Custom ordained that this young visitor must wait 
for the old man to give him an opening to direct the conver- 
sation as he desired. But the Agha did not yet seem inclined 
to emerge out of his own twiht world into any reality of the 
day. He signed to his serving-boy, who handed the master a 
small leather case, which he held in readiness. Rifaat Bereket 
pressed a spring, and the case flew open; his thin, old fingers 
stroked the satin, which embedded two ancient coins, one 
silver, the other gold. 

“You are a very learned man, who has studied at the Paris 
university, a deapherer and knower of inscriptions. I am only 
an uneducated lover of antiquity, who could never vie with 
you. But in die last few days I have had these trifles prepared 
as a gift for you. The one, the silver coin, was struck a thou- 
sand years ago by that Armenian king whose name resembles 
that of your family, Ashod Bagrathuni. It comes from the 
neighbourhood of Lake Van, and they are rarely found. The 
other, the gold, is of Hellenic origin. You can decipher the 
profound and beautiful inscription, even without a magnifying- 
glass: 

“ ‘To the inexplicable, in us and above us.’ ” 

Gabriel Bagradian rose to take dv* gift. “You shame mi^ 
Father. Really I do not know how to thank you. We have 
always been proud of bearing a similar-sounding name. How 
plastic the head is! A real Armenian head. And one should 
wear the Greek com round one’s neck as an admonition. ‘To 
the inexplicable, in us and above us.’ What philosophers 
those must have been who paid their way in coins like these. 
How low we have sunk!” 

The Agha nodded, pleased indeed with so conservadve a 
■enument. ‘Tou are right. How low we have sunk I” 

35 



Gabriel laid the coins back on the satin. But it would have 
been impobte too soon to change the subject o£ the gift. “I 
would beg you to choose yourself a present in exchange from 
among my collection of antiques. But I know that your belief 
forbids you to set up any image that casts a shadow.” 

On this point the old man hngered with unmistakable sat^ 
isf action. “Yes, and for that very reason you Europeans de- 
spise our holy Koran. Is there not supreme insight concealed 
in this law, which forbids all statues that cast shadows? The 
imitation of the Creator and His creation is the first begin- 
ning of that wild pride in men which leads on to destruction.” 

“These times and this war seem to show us that your 
prophet was in the right, Agha.” 

This conversational bridge extended its curve towards the 
Agha. He began to cross it. “Yes, so it is. Man, as the inso- 
lent imitator of God, as technician, falls into atheism. That is 
the deepest reason for this war into which the West has 
dragged us. To our misfortune. Since what have we to gain 
by it?” 

Bagradian tested the next step. “And they have infected 
Turkey with their most dangerous pestilence — raaal hatred.” 

Rifaat Bereket tilted his head a little backwards. His soft 
fingers were playing lisdessly with the beads of his amber 
rosary. It was as if these hands emitted a faint aureole of 
sanctity. “It is the worst of doctrines, to bid us seek our own 
faults in our neighbours.” 

“God bless you! To seek our own faults in our neighbours. 
This doctrine has possession of all Europe. But today, alas, I 
have had to learn that it has its adepts even among Turks 
and Moslems.” 

“To which Turks do you refer?” The Agha’s fingers sud- 
denly ceased to tell his beads. “Do you mean that absurd pack 
of imitators at Istanbul? And the imitators of those imitators? 
The apes in frock-coats and dinner-jackets? Those traitors, 
those atheists, who would anmhilate God’s umverse itself 

^6 



merely in order to get money and power? Those are neither 
Turks nor Moslems. They are mere empty rascals and money- 
grubbers.” 

Gabriel lifted the tiny coffee cup, in which by now there 
was only thick sediment. An embarrassed gesture. “I adimt 
that years ago I sat together with these people, because I ex- 
pected good things from them. I took them for idealists, and, 
perhaps, in those days they really were so. Youth always be- 
lieves in everything new. But today, alas, I am forced to see 
the truth as you see it. Just now, in the hamam, I heard a talk 
which troubles me greatly. That is the reason why I visit you 
at this unseemly hour.” 

The Agha’s perspicacity needed no closer indication. “Was 
this talk of the secret army order degrading Armemans to 
street-sweeping and service as porters?” 

Gabriel Bagradian deciphered the flowery riddle of the 
carpet at his feet. “Even this morning I sull awaited orders to 
join my regiment. . . . Then there was also some talk of the 
town of Zeitun. Help me. What exaedy is happening? What 
has occurred?” 

The amber beads were again flowing evenly through the 
Agha’s fingers. “As to Zeitun, I am well informed. What has 
happened there happens every day in the mountains. Some af- 
fair of thieving hordes, deserters and saptiehs. There were a 
few Armenian deserters. Before, nobody noticed such things.” 
His voice was more deliberate as he added: “But what are 
occurrences? They are only what interpretation makes of 
them.” 

Gabriel seemed about to lose control. “That’s just it. In the 
solitude in which I live no news of it reached me. The basest 
interpretations are being attempted. What does the govern- 
ment intend?” 

The sage put aside these indignant words with a weary 
movement of the hands. “I will tell you something, friend and 
son of my friend. A karmic destiny hovers over you, sine*: a 

37 



part of you belong to the Russian empire the other part o£ 
you to us. The war has cleft you. You are dispersed among 
the nations. . . . Yet since, in this world, all things interpene- 
trate, we too are submitted to your destiny.” 

“Would it not be better to do as we did in 1968 and strive 
to reconcile and adjust?” 

“Rcconalc? That is no more than an empty word used by 
worldlings. On earth there is no rcconaliation. We live here 
in corruption and self-assertion.” 

And, to confirm this view, the Agha, in prescribed sing- 
song, quoted a verse of the sixteenth sura: “And He created 
the earth diverse m colour; see, there is in this truly a sign, 
for those that can take warning.” 

Gabriel, who could no longer sit qmet on the divan, stood 
up. The old man’s astonished eyes, reprimanding so arbitrary 
a movement, forced him to sit again. 

“You wish to know the government’s intentions? I only 
know that the atheists in Istanbul need racial hatred for their 
purposes, since the deepest essence of all godlessncss is fear, 
and the sense of having lost the game. So that now, of every 
litde city, they make a sounding-box of rumours, to spread 
abroad their evil will. It is good you have come to me.” 

Gabriel’s right hand tightened round the case vtdth the 
coins. “If it were only I . . . But, as you know, I am not 
alone. My brother Avetis died without issue, so that my 
thirteen-year-old son is the last of our family. Moreover, I 
have married a Frenchwoman, who must not be dragged into 
this calamity, which docs not concern her.” 

The Agha dismissed this plea with some severity. “She be- 
longs to your nation, smee you have married her, and cannot 
be absolved from its karma.” 

It would have been a vain attempt to explain to this con- 
firmed Oriental the feminine independence of the West. So 
Bagradian ignored this objection. “I should have sent my 
family abroad, or at least to Istanbul. But now th^ have 

38 



taken, away oar passports, and I can expect nothing good from 
the Kaim^am.” 

The Turk placed his right hand on his guest’s knee. “I must 
seriously warn you not to go to Istanbul with your family, 
even if you should find the journey possible.” 

“What do you mean? Why? In Istanbul I have friends of 
all kinds, even in government circles. There our business has 
its central office. My name is very well known there.” 

The hand on Gabriel’s knee became heavier. “For that 
very reason— because you are so well known there— I would 
warn you against even a short stay in the capital” 

“Because of the fighting in the Dardane ll es?” 

“No. Not because of that.” The Agha’s face became in- 
scrutable. Before continuing, he listened to some inner voice. 
“No one can tell how far the government may go. But this 
much is certain — the great and respected among your people 
will be the first to suffer. And it is equally certain in such a 
case that arrests and accusations will be begun in the capital.” 

“Do you speak by hearsay, or have you any certain grounds 
for your warning?” 

The Agha let his amber beads vanish into his wide sleeve, 
“Yes, I have certain grounds.” 

Now Gabriel could no longer control himself and sprang 
up. “What shall we do?” 

“If I may advise you — go home to your house in Yogho-» 
noluk, stay there in peace, and wait. You could not have chosen 
a pleasanter place of sojourn for yourself and your family, in 
the circumstances.” 

“In peace?” Gabriel cried out scornfully. “It is already a 
prison.” 

Rifaat Bereket turned away his face, perturbed by this loud 
voice in the quiet selamlik. “You must not lose your self- 
control Forgive me if my candid words have wounded you. 
You have not the least reason for anxiety. Probably it will all 
vanish in sand. Nothing bad can happen in our vilayet, since, 

39 



God be praised, Djelal Bey is the Wali. He submits to no 
high-handed measures. Yet whatever is to come is there 
already, enfolded within itself, like bud, blossom, and fruit 
within the seed. What will happen to us has happened already 
in God.” 

Riled by these flowery theological commonplaces, Bagradian, 
careless now of forms, paced up and down. “The most horrible 
thin g IS that there is nothing to hold on to — ^nothing to fight 
against.” 

The Agha approached the distraught Gabriel, to hold his 
two hands firmly within his own. “Never forget, my friend, 
that the blasphemous knaves from your Committee are no 
more than a very small minority. Our people is a kindly 
people. If again and agam blood has been shed in anger, you 
yourselves are no less guilty of that than we. And then — 
there are enough men of God who live in the tekkehs, in the 
cloisters, and fight for the purity of the future within their 
holy circles of prayer. Either they win or we all perish. I 
must tell you, too, that my journey to Anatolia and Istanbul 
is to be made on behalf of the Armenians. I implore you to 
trust in God.” 

The Agha’s httle hands were strong enough to pacify 
Gabriel. “You arc righ*^. I will do as you say. Best to creep back 
into Yoghonoluk and not stir again till the war is over.” 

Still the Agha did not let go of his hands. “Promise me 
that at home you will say no word of all these things. After 
all, why should you? If all goes as before, you will only have 
frightened people unnecessarily. If any evil should come 
upon you, the fear of it will have been of no avail. You under- 
stand me — trust, and keep silence.” 

And in taking leave he repeated urgently: “Trust, and 
keep silence. . . . You will not see me again for many months. 
But think that in all that time I shall be workmg for you. 
I received much kindness from your fathers. And now, in 
my age, God is permitting me to be grateful.” 

40 



3 


The Notables of Yoghonoluk 

The ride home took some time, since Gabriel seldom galloped 
his horse and kept letting it slow down to its own pace. This 
also led to his straying ofl the shortest road and remaining on 
the highroad along the Orontes. Only when, beyond the 
clustered houses of Suedia and £1 Eskel, the far sea-line came 
into sight, did the rider start out of his dream and turn oS 
sharply northwards, into the valley of Armenian villages. He 
reached the road — if the rough cart-track could be called one — 
which linked the seven to one another, just as the long spring 
dusk was gathering. 

Yoghonoluk was nearly in the centre. Therefore he had to 
ride through the southern villages, Wakef, Kheder Beg, 
Hadji Habibli, to reach home, which would scarcely be 
possible before darkness. But he was in no hurry. 

In these hours the village streets round Musa Dagh were 
crowded. People all stood out in front of their doors. The 
gentleness of a Sunday evening brought them together. Bodies, 
eyes, voices, sought one another, to enhance, with family gossip 
and general complaints about the times, the pleasure of being 
alive. Sex and degrees of age made separate groups. Matrons 
stood eyeing each other askance, the young wives joyous in 
their Sunday best, the girls full of laughter. Their coin- 
ornaments tinkled. They displayed their magnificent teeth. 
Gabriel was struck by the numbers of able-bodied young men, 
fit for the army, but not yet called up. They joked and 
hughed as though no Enver Pasha existed for them. From 

41 



' vineyards and orchards came the nasal twangings of the tar, 
the Armenian guitar. A few ovcr-industrious men were jwet- 
paring their handiwork. The Turkish day ends with dusk, and 
so the Sabbath rest ends also. Settled, industrious men felt the 
urge to fuss over odd jobs before going to bed. 

Instead of calling them by their Turkish names, it would 
have been possible to christen the villages by the handicraft 
which distinguished each. All planted grapes and fruit. 
Scarcely any, grain. But their fame was for skill in handicraft. 
Here was Hadji Habibli, the wood-workers’ village. Its men 
not only cut the best hardwood and bone combs, pipes, 
cigarette-holders, and such like objects for daily use, but could 
carve ivory crucifixes, madonnas, statues of the saints, which 
were sent as far as Aleppo, Damascus, Jerusalem. These carv- 
ings had their own style, achieved only in the shadow of 
Musa Dagh; they were not mere rough peasant handiwork. 
Wakef was the lace village. The delicate kerchiefs and cover- 
lets of its women found buyers even in Egypt, without the 
artists knowing that this was so, since their wares were sent 
only to the markets in Antioch, and that not more than twice 
a year. Of Azir and its silkworms we have spoken. The silk 
was spun in Kheder Beg. In the two largest villages, Bitias 
and Yoghonoluk, all these various crafts worked side by side. 
But Kebussiye, the most northern, isolated village, kept bees. 
The honey of Kebussiye, or so at least Bagradian considered, 
had not its equal anywhere on earth. The bees sucked from 
the innermost essence of Musa Dagh, from its magic dower 
of beauty, which set it apart from all the other melancholy 
peaks in the land. Why should it have been Musa Dagh which 
gushed forth such innumerable springs, most of whose waters 
fell, in long, cascading veils, to the sea? Why Musa Dagh, and 
not Turkish mountains, like Naulu Dagh and Jebd Akra? 
Truly it seemed as though, miraculously, the divine quality 
in water, offended in some unknown previous time by Mos> 
lems, the sons of the desert, had withdrawn from ofi these 

42 



arid, imploring heights to enrich with superabundance a 
Christian mountain. The flower-strewn meadows of its eastern 
slopes, the fat pasturage of its many-folded flanks, its lithe 
orchards of apricot, vine, and orange around its feet; its 
quiet, as of protectmg seraphim — all this seemed scarcely 
touched by the fall of man, under which, in rocky melancholy, 
the rest of Asia Minor mourns. It was as though, through 
some small negligence in the setting up of the divine order of 
the world — the good-natured indulgence of an archangel open 
to persuasion, and who loved his home — an afterglow, a 
reminiscent flavour of Paradise, had been allowed to linger 
on for ever in the lands around Musa Dagh. Here along the 
Syrian coast, and a little farther, in the country of four rivers, 
where experts in Bibhcal geography are so fond of locating 
the Garden of Eden. 

It goes without saying that the seven villages round the 
mountain had retained their share of this benediction. They 
were not to be compared with the wretched hamlets which 
Gabriel had passed as he rode through the plain. Here there 
were no loam huts, which had not even the look of human- 
dwellings, but of caked deposits into which someone had 
bored a dark hole for living-room and stable, humans and 
beasts. Most of these houses were built of stone. Each con- 
tained several rooms. Little verandas ran round the walls. 
Walls and windows sparkled with cleanlmess. Only a few 
huts from the dark ages, observing the custom of the East, 
had no windows turned towards the street. As far as the 
dark shadows of Damlayik extended, sharp across the plain, 
so far this friendly prosperity was evident. Beyond these 
shadows began the desert. Here, wine, fruit, mulb«ry, terrace 
upon terrace; there the flat, monotonous fields of maize and 
cotton, revealing in places the naked steppe, as a beggar shows 
his skin through rags. But it was not only the blessmg of the 
mountain. Here, after half a century, the energy of old Avetis 
Bagradian had borne full fruit, the love of this one enterprising 

43 



man, who had concentrated such stormy energies on this, his 
strip of native earth, despite all the enticements of the world. 
That man’s grandson watched with astonished eyes this 
people invested in some strange beauty. The chattering groups 
became silent a few minutes before his approach; they turned 
towards the centre of the street and greeted him with loud 
evening salutations: “Ban mkun!” He believed — ^it may have 
been fancy — that he saw in their eyes a brief flicker of grati- 
tude, not towards him, but towards the ancient benefactor. 
Women and girls stood looking after him; the spindles in 
their hands twirled in and out, hke separate beings. 

These people were no less foreign than the crowd that day 
in the bazaar. What had he to do with them — ^hc who a few 
months ago had gone out for drives into the Bois, attended 
Bergson’s lectures, talked of books, published articles on art 
in precious reviews? And yet, deep peace enveloped him 
from them. Because he had seen the threat of which they knew 
nothing, he felt some strange fathcrliness towards them. He 
bore a great load of care in his heart, he alone, and would 
keep It from them as long as he could. The old Agha Rifaat 
Bereket was no dreamer, even though he wrapped his shrewd- 
ness m flowery sayings. He was right. Stay in Yoghonoluk 
and await the event. Musa Dagh stood beyond the world. No 
storm would reach it, even if one should break. 

A warm love of his people invaded Gabriel. May you long 
continue to rejoice; tomorrow, the day after . . . 

And, from his horse, he raised his hand gravely m greeting. 

In cool, starry darkness he chmbed the road through the park 
to the villa. He entered the big hall of his house. The old 
wrought-iron lamp hanging from its ceiling rejoiced his heart 
with Its pale light. In some incomprehensible cranny of con- 
sciousness It seemed hke his mother. Not that old lady who, 
in Paris, in a standardized Parisian flat, had welcomed him 
back from the lyc% with a peck, but the mildly silent mother 

44 



of days as impalpable as dreams. “Hokud madagh kes kurban” 
— ^had she redly ever spoken those Eastern words as she bent 
down over her sleeping child? “May I be as a sacrifice to your 
soul.” 

There was only one other benediction from that primal age 
— the little lamp under the Madonna in the mche on the stairs. 
Everything else dated from the time of the young Avetis. 
And those, in so far at least as the hall was concerned, had 
been days of war and of the chase. Trophies and arms himg 
on the walls, a whole collection of ancient bedouin rifles, with 
very long barrels. That this sohtary master had been more 
than a man of one crude passion was proved by some magnifi* 
cent bits of furmture — chests, carpets, lustres, which he had 
brought back home with him from his travels, and which 
delighted Juliette. 

As Gabriel absent-mindedly went upstairs, he scarcely heard 
the babel of voices from the rooms on the ground floor. The 
notables of Yoghonoluk were assembled. In his room he stood 
some time by the open window and stared, immobile, at the 
black silhouette of the Damlayik, which at that hour seemed 
twice its size. It was ten minutes before he rang for his valet, 
Missak, whom, on his brother’s death, he had taken into his 
service, along with Kristaphor, the steward, Hovhannes, the 
cook, and all the other house and outside staff. 

Gabriel washed from head to foot and changed. Then he 
went into Stephan’s room. The boy was already in bed and so 
childishly fast asleep that not even the glare of an electric 
torch could wake him. The windows were open, and outside 
the masses of plane tree crowns rusded in some slow presenu- 
ment. Here, too, the black, living mass of Musa Dagh invaded 
the room. But now the crest of the mountain glowed against 
some gently shining depths, as though there had been no 
salt sea behind it, but a sea composed of the gleaming essence 
of eternity. Bagradian sat on a chair beside the bed. 'That 
morning the son had watched his father asleep. Now it was 

45 



the father who watched his son. But that was permitted 

Stephan’s forehead (it was Gabriel’s forehead over again) 
shimmered translucent. Below it the shadows of closed eyes, 
like two rose leaves blown from outside on to his face. Even 
asleep, you could see how big these eyes were. The pointed, 
narrow nose was not his father’s; it was Juliette’s legacy, 
exotic. Stephan breathed quickly. The walls of his sleep en- 
cased a rushing life. His folded hands were pressed against his 
body, as though he had to keep tight hold of reins or gal- 
loping dreams might run away with him. 

The son’s sleep became restless. The father did not move. 
He drew his son’s face into himself. Did he fear for Stephan? 
He could not teU. No thoughts were in him. At last he stood 
up, unable, as he did so, to stifle a sigh, so depressed he felt. 
As he fumbled his way out, he bumped a table. The dark 
intensified the short noise. Gabrid stood sail. He was afraid 
he had waked Stephan. A boy’s drowsy voice in the dark 
murmured: “Who’s that . . . Dad, is it you?’’ 

At once his breathing became quiet again. Gabriel, who had 
switched off the electric torch, after a while switched it on 
Again, bhnding its litde light with his hand. The beam 
caught the table, on which lay drawings. Stephan had already 
got to work and begun a sketch of Musa Dagh, as his father 
suggested. A hesitant sketcL Avakian’s many red pencil- 
corrections intersected the hnes. 

Bagradian did not at first remember the stimulus he had 
given his son, when they met that morning. Then he recol- 
lected the stormy eagerness with which his son had sought 
and tried to persuade him. The uncertain sketch had become 
a symbol. 

The reception-room of the villa led out into a wide room, 
which opened into the hall. It was barely furnished and used 
only as an anteroom. Old Avetis had built his residence with 
a view to numerous descendants, so that neither the solitary 

46 



hunter nor this small family, now remaining^ could use more 
than a few of the rooms. An oil lamp, screwed down to the 
floor, lit this bare anteroom. Gabriel stopped for an instant 
and listened to the voices next door. He heard Juliette laugh. 
So she was pleased, then, with the admiration of the Armenian 
villagers in there. Something gained. 

Old Dr. Bedros Altouni was just opening the door on his 
way out. He lit the candle in his lantern and took up his 
leather bag, which stood on a chair. Altouni only noticed his 
host when Bagradian called to hi m softly: “Hairik Bedros” — 
Bedros, litde Father. The doctor started. He was a small, 
shrivelled man with an untidy goatee, a survival of those 
Armenians who, unlike the younger generation, seemed to 
bear on their shoulders the whole load of a persecuted race. 
In his youth, as Avetis Bagradian’s protege and at his expense, 
he had studied medicine in Vienna and seen the world. In 
those days the benefactor of Yoghonoluk had cherished vast 
projects, which even included the building of a hospital. But 
he had gone no further than to install the district doctor, 
though this was much, considering the general state of affairs. 
Of all living people Gabriel had known this old doctor longest, 
this “hekim” who had brought him into the world. He felt 
tenderly respectful towards him, another legacy of his feelmgs 
as a child. Dr. Altoum was struggling into a rough serge over- 
coat, which looked as though it might have been a relic of 
his student days in Vienna. 

“I couldn’t wait any longer for you, my child. . . . Wdl, 
what did you manage to get out of the Hukiimet?” 

Gabriel glanced at the shrivelled litde face. Everything in 
this old man was angular — his movements, his voice, even the 
occasional sharpness of what he said. He had been sharpened, 
inside and out. The road from Yoghonoluk to the vrood- 
carvers’ village on the one side, the beekeepers’ village on the 
other, seemed damnably long when you had to travel it several 
times a week on the hard back of a donkey. Gabriel recognized 

47 



the eternal leather bag in which, besides sticking-plaster, 
thermometer, surgical instruments, and a German medical 
handbook dated 1875, there was only a pair of antediluvian 
obstetrical forceps. The sight of this medical bag made him 
swallow down an impulse to confide his experiences in 
Antioch. 

“Nothing special,” he answered, dismissing it. 

Altouni fastened the lantern to his belt and buckled it. 
“I’ve had to renew my teskere at least seven times in my life. 
They take them away to get the tax which you’ve got to pay 
on every new one. It’s an old game. But they won’t get any 
more out of me. I shan’t need any more passports in this 
world.” And he added caustically: “Not that I even needed 
the others. It’s forty years now since I moved out of here.” 

Bagradian turned his head to the door. “What sort of a 
people are we, who submit without a murmur to everything?” 

“Submit?” The doctor seemed to relish the word. “You 
young people don’t know what submitting means. You’ve 
grown up in very different times.” 

But Gabriel stuck to his question: “What sort of people 
are we?” 

“My dear child, you’ve lived all your life in Europe. And 
I should have, too, if only I’d stopped in Vienna. It was my 
great misfortune I ever left it. I might have become some- 
body. But you see, your grandfiither was as big a fool as your 
brother, and he wouldn’t so much as hear of an outside world. 
I had to sign a promise to come back. It was my misfortune. 
It would have been better if he’d never sent me away.” 

“One can’t always go on livmg as a foreigner.” The Parisian 
Gabriel felt surprised at his own words. 

Altouni laughed harshly. “And here — can one live here? 
With uncertainty always in the background? I suppose you 
fancied it all very different.” 

Suddenly the thought came to Bagradian: “We shall at 
least have to do something to defend ourselves.” 

48 



Altoiuii set down his bag on the chair again. “Curse iti 
What arc we talking about? You’re dragging the old stories 
out of me again. I’m a doctor, and I’ve never believed par- 
ticularly in ^d. And yet, at one time, I was always having 
arguments with Hun about it. You can be a Russian, or a 
Turk, or a Hottentot, or God krw)ws what— but to be an 
Armenian — ^why it’s impossible.” 

He seemed to jerk himself back from the edge of a gulf to 
which he had strayed. “That’s enough. Let’s leave all that. 
I am the hekun. lliat’s all that matters to me. And I’ve just 
been called away from this pleasant company to a woman in 
labour. You see, we sull keep putting Armenian children into 
the world. It’s crazy.” 

Grimly he seized his leather bag. This talk on the threshold, 
which had gone to the roots of the matter, seemed to have 
riled him. “And you? What’s wrong with you? You’ve got a 
very beautiful wife, a clever son, no worries, all the money 
you want— what more do you need? You live your lifel 
Don’t bother yourself with all this filth. Whenever the Turks 
have a war, they leave us in peace — ^wc’ve always known that. 
And after the war you’ll go back to Paris and forget all about 
us and Musa Dagh.” 

Gabriel Bagradian smiled as though he were not taking his 
own question seriously. 

“And suppose they don’t leave us in peace, litde Father?” 

Gabkiei. stopped an instant on the threshold of the big 
reception-room. About a dozen people were assembled. Three 
elderly women sat together round a little table, in silence, 
with the tutor keeping them company, presumably at Juliette’s 
orders. But even he seemed to take no trouble to get them to 
talk. One of these matrons. Dr. Altouni's wife, was also a sur- 
vival of Gabriel’s childhood. Her name was Maink Antaram, 
little Mother Antaram. She wore black silk. Her hair, drawn 
back oflf her forehead, was not yet quite grey. Her wide bony 

49 



face had a look of daring in it. Even though she said nothing, 
she sat at her ease, allowing her inquisitive glances to travel 
freely about these people. The same could not be said of her 
neighbours, the wives of Harutiun Nokhudian, the pastor of 
Bitias, and of the village mayor, the Mukhtar of Yoghonoluk, 
Thomas Kebussyan. It was enough to look at them to see how 
embarrassed they felt, how much on their best behaviour, even 
though they had taken all their finery out of the wardrobe so 
as not to be shamed by the Frenchwoman. 

Madame Kebussyan had the worst time, since she could not 
understand a word of French, though she was one of those 
who had been to school in the American mission at Marash. 
She blinked up at this extravagant candlelight, from lustres 
and chandeliers. Ah, Madame Bagradian had no need to 
economize' Where did she buy such thick wax candles? They 
must have come from Aleppo or Istanbul even. The Mukhtar 
Kebussyan might be the richest man in the district, but in his 
house, apart from petroleum, they only burned thin tallow 
candles and tapers of mutton-fat. And over there, next the 
piano, in tall candlesticks, there were even two painted candles, 
as in church. Wasn’t that going a bit too far? 

The pastor’s wife, who was feeling equally ill at ease, asked 
herself this very same question. To her honour be it said that, 
in her case, no squinting envy coloured her feelings. The 
women’s hands were folded on their laps. This evening, in 
honour of the soiree, they had left their sewing at home. 
The wives of the pastor and the mukhtar eyed their husbands 
in astomshment at these two old men. 

And indeed both gentle pastor and massive mukhtar had 
changed completely. They formed only a part of the mascuhne 
group around Juliette. (She was just then displaying the 
antiques which Gabriel had collected and set up in this 
room.) Among this group were the two schoolmasters, one of 
whom, Hapeth Shatakhian, had once spent a few weeks in 
Lausanne and ever since been conscious of the fact that he 

50 



had an unusually good French accent. The other, Hrand 
Oskanian, was a dwarf, whose black hair grew very bw 
upon his forehead. As Gabriel entered the room, he heard 
the loud-voiced French of the proud Shatakhian: “But, 
Madame, we should be so grateful to you for bringing a ray 
of culture into our wilderness.” 

That day Juliette had had an inner conflict to sustain. It 
had been so hard to decide in which clothes to receive her 
new fellow-countrymen. So far, on such occasions, she had 
always dressed very simply, since it had seemed to her both 
undigmfied and superfluous to attempt to dazzle “ignorant 
half-savages.” But even the last time she had noticed how 
the magic she could shed upon her guests was reflected back 
upon herself. So that today she had yielded to temptation and 
chosen her most elaborate evemng frock. (“Oh, well,” she had 
thought as she examined it, “it dates from last spring, and at 
home I shouldn’t dare show my nose in it.”) After some 
hesitation, since the frock itself was so resplendent, she had 
also decided to wear jewellery. The effect of this dehberate 
decision, of wbch she had at first been rather ashamed, sur- 
prised even her. It is pleasant enough to be a beautiful woman 
among many, but the feeling soon wears off. In lighted 
restaurants one is only a pretty member of a beauty chorus. 
But to be the unique, the ycUow-haircd chatelaine, among all 
these dark, glittcring-cyed Armemans — that surely was no 
everyday fate! It was an experience, brmging back the flush 
of youth, a glow to the lips, a hght of triumph to the eyes. 

Gabriel found his wife surrounded by humble, 
admirers. When Juliette moved, he rccogmzcd again her 
“sparkhng step,” as he once had called it. Juliette, here in 
Yoghonoluk, seemed to have found her way into the hearts 
of his simple-minded compatriots, though in Europe she had 
often jibbed at the society of the most cultivated Armenians. 
And strangest of all ... In Beirut, overtaken by the war, 
without any chance to get back home, Gabriel had been 



haunted by the fear that Juliette would be devoured with 
homesickness. France was fighting the worst batdes in her 
history. European newspapers seldom reached that corner 
of the world. One was entirely cut off, could find out noth- 
ing. Till now only one letter, dated November, had reached 
them, by many long detours. From Juhette's mother. Lucky 
that at least she had no brothers. Her marriage with a for- 
eigner had estranged her a httle from her family. Be that 
as it might, her present tranquil frivolity had come as a great 
surprise to Gabriel. She seldom seemed to think about home. 
In this fourteenth year of their married life the unhoped-for 
seemed to have taken place. 

And indeed there was something esscnually new in her, 
as she put her arms round his neck. “At last, mon ami, I was 
just bcginnmg to be anxious.” 

She began to be concerned with his hunger and thirst, 
almost to the point of exaggeration. But Gabriel had no tune 
to cat. He was surrounded. Naturally that morning’s official 
inspecuon had not passed without leaving some trace on 
people’s minds. The very fact that the Turkish authorities 
should have chosen a Sunday — ^the hour of high mass — ^for 
their visit, might itself be considered a hostile sign. An omen 
of intricate hostility. 

But the Musa Dagh colony had been almost spared in the 
bloody events of 1896 and 1909. Yet such men as Kebussyan 
and the little pastor of Bitias were sharp-eared enough to be- 
come alert at the slightest suspiaous rusding. Only this 
evening-party and Juliette’s radiant presence had been enough 
to distract them from such troubling of their peace. Now, as, 
remembering his promise, Gabriel repeated the mudir’s words 
— that this was no more than a general war-time measure — 
they all, Kebussyan, Nokhudian, the schoolmasters, had of 
course long since answered the riddle themselves. They became 
light-heartedly optiimstic. The most hopeful of all was 
Shatakhian. He drew himself up to his full height. The Middle 

52 



Ages were over, he opined, addressing his gbwing words to 
Madame Bagradian. The sun of progress would rise, even over 
Turkey. This war was its crimson dawn. The Turkish govern- 
ment was under the surveillance of its allies. Shatakhian 
glanced expectantly at Juhettc. Had he not acclaimed prog- 
ress in faultless French? His hearers, in so far as they under- 
stood them, seemed to share his views. Only the silent Oskan- 
ian, the other teacher, smiled sarcastically. But he always did 
when friend Shatakhian let himself go and revelled in his 
own linguistic verbosity. Another voice made itself heard: 
“Never mind the Turks. Let’s talk about something more 
important.” 

This had been said by Krikor, the apothecary, the most 
remarkable person in the room. 

Krikor’s very garb denoted the fact that his character was 
subject to no change. All the other men, even the mukhtar, 
wore European dress (a tailor, back from London, lived in 
Yoghonoluk). Knkor had on a kind of light-blue Russian 
blouse, but made of the softest raw silk. His face, without a 
wrinkle in spite of the fact that he was sixty, with its white 
goatee and rather slanting eyes, was more that of a wise 
mandarin than an Armenian. He spoke in a high, but oddly 
hollow, voice, which sounded as though much learning had 
exhausted it. And in fact Apothecary i^ikor owned a library 
surely unequalled in all Syria — and was moreover himself a 
walking library, a man of encyclopaedic information, in one of 
the remotest valleys on earth. Be the subject the flora of Musa 
Dagh, desert geology, an cxunct species of bird, copper smelt- 
ing, meteorology, the fathers of the Church, fixed stars, cook- 
ing receipts, the Persian secret of extracting oil of roses — 
Krikor’s hollow voice could supply information, and that in 
a careless, casual manner, as though it were rather an im- 
pertinence to have asked him such a trivial question. There 
are many “know-alls” in the world. But Krikor’s genuine 

5S 



personality could not have shown itself by this alone. No, 
Krikor was like his library. 

This was composed of only a few thousand volumes, most 
of which were written in languages which he himself was 
unable to read. Providence had set many obstacles m the way 
of his ruling passion. Such French and Armenian works as he 
possessed were the least interesting. But Krikor was more 
than learned, he was a bibliophile. The bibliophile is more 
enamoured of the very existence of a book than of its form 
and contents. He has no need to read it. (Is not all true love 
much the same.?) The apothecary was not a rich man. He 
could not afford to give expensive orders to book-sellers and 
antique shops in Istanbul or abroad. He could scarcely 
have paid the freightage. He had to take what came his way. 
The foundations of his hbrary, he insisted, had already been 
laid in his boyhood and his years of travel. Now he had 
agents and patrons in Anuoch, Alexandretta, Aleppo, Damas- 
cus, who from time to time sent him a parcel of books. What 
a red-letter day when they arrived! Whatever they might be 
—Arabic or Hebrew fohos, French novels, second-hand rub- 
bish — ^what did It matter, they were always so much printed 
paper. Krikor contained within himself that deep Armeman 
love of culture, the secret of all very ancient races which sur- 
vive the centuries. This queer, and most of it unread, library 
would scarcely have sufficed to supply the apothecary’s vast 
store of informauon. His own creative audacity filled in the 
gaps. Krikor completed his universe. Any question, from 
statistics to theology, he answered out of his plenitude of 
power. The innocent hairiness of poets glowed in his veins 
each time he threw out a few major scientific terms. That 
such a man had disciples goes without saying. Equally obvious 
that they were composed of the schoolmasters of all seven vil- 
lages. Apothecary l^ikor was the Socrates of Musa Dagh — a 
peripatetic who, usually in the night, took long walks with 
these, his disciples. Such walks offered nuuiy chances to in- 

54 



crease his followers’ respect He would point up at the starry 
sky. 

“Hapcth Shatakhian, do you know the name of that red- 
dish star, up there?”— “Which? That one there? Isn’t that a 
planet?”— “Wrong, Schoolmaster. That star is called Alde- 
baran. And do you know what gives it that reddish tinge?” — 
“Well— perhaps our atmosphere.” — ^“Wrong, Teacher. The 
star Aldebaran is composed of molten, magnetic iron, and 
that’s what makes it look so red. Such at least is the opinion 
of the famous Camille Flammarion, as he writes in 1^ last 
letter to me.” 

And that great astronomer’s letter was no mere empty 
fabrication. It existed in fact. Krikor, in the person of Camille 
Flammarion, had written the letter to himsdf. To be sure, he 
rarely sent himself such letters; only on the most solemn 
occasions. Usually the disciples heard nothing of them, since 
even Voltaire and Raffi, the great Armenian poet, had several 
times been inspired to exhaustive answers to Krikor’s ques- 
tions. Knkor was therefore a corresponding member of 
Olympus. 

All the educated famihes in Musa Dagh took an annual 
holiday, if only to Aleppo or Marash, to the American, French, 
German missionary schools there, in which their education 
had been completed. Not a few among the village elders had 
returned from America to enjoy their earnings. Almost as war 
broke out, a batch of emigres had crossed the Atlantic. Only 
Krikor had remained where he was. It was rare for Kinri 
even to visit a neighbouring village. In his youth, he declared, 
his bodily eyes had seen enough wonders of the world. Occa- 
sionally he hinted at these journeyings, which had lost them- 
selves m remote distances, eastwards and westwards, but in 
which he had, on principle, taken no train. It is uncertain 
whether they were of the same nature as Flammarion’s letter. 
Nothing in Krikor’s tales savoured in the least of exaggeration 
or bragging. His accoimts were steeped in shrewd observa- 

55 



tion and consistency, so that even such a man as Bagradian 
might not have suspected. But Krikor was always insisting 
on how litde need he saw for travel. All places were alike, 
since the outside world is contained in the mner. The sage 
sits, quiet as a spider, in the net which his mind has spun 
round the universe. So that, when the talk was of war or 
pohtics, of any burning question of the hour, Krikor would 
begin to get restless. Last arrogance of the mind! He despised 
all wars not contained in books. That was why Krikor had 
snubbed the political observations of the schoolteacher. And 
he concluded: 

“I can’t make out why people must be for ever eyeing 
their neighbours. War, government orders, Wali, Kaimakam 
— let the Turks do as they please. If you don’t worry about 
them, they won’t worry about you. We have our own earth 
here. And it has distinguished admirers. If you please . . 

With this Krikor introduced a young man to his host, a 
foreigner, who had ather been hidden by all the others or 
whom Gabriel had failed to notice. Krikor rolled out the 
young man’s sonorous name: “Gonzague Maris.” 

This young man, to judge by his appearance, was a Euro- 
pean, or at least a distinctly Europeanized Levantine. His 
small black moustache, on a pale, highly alert face, looked as 
French as his name sounded. His most distinctive trait were 
the eyebrows, which forked upwards in a blunt angle. Krikor 
played herald to the foreigner: “Monsieur Gonzague Maris is 
a Greek.” 

At once he improved on this, as though he were afraid of 
demeaning his guest: “Not a Turkish Greek, but a European.” 

This stranger had very long eyelashes. He was smiling, 
and these feminine lashes were lowered almost over his eyes. 
“My father was Greek, my mother’s French. I’m an Ameri- 
can.” 

The quiet, almost shy approach of this young stranger 
favourably impressed Bagradian. He shook his hand. “What 

56 



extraordinary combination of circumstances — ^if you don’t mind 
my calling it that — brings an American with a French mother 
here— of all places?” 

Gonzague smiled again, lowering his eyes. “It’s qmte simple. 
I had business for a few weeks m Alexandretta and got ill 
there. The doctor sent me up to the hills, to Beilan. Beilan 
didn’t suit me. ... In Alexandretta they told me so much 
about Musa Dagh that I felt inquisitive. It was a great surprise 
to me, in the God-forsaken East, to find such beauty, such 
cultured people, and such comfort as I’m enjoying with my 
host. Monsieur Knkor. I like everything strange. If Musa 
Dagh were in Europe, it’d be famous. Well, I’m glad it 
belongs only to you.” 

The apothecary announced, in the hollow, indifferent voice 
which he used for giving important mfoimauon: “He’s a 
writer, and he’s going to work in my house.” 

But Gonzague Mans seemed embarrassed. “I’m not a writer. 
I send an occasional article to an American newspaper. That’s 
all I do. I’m not even a real journalist.” Vaguely, with a 
gesture, he indicated that his scribbling was no more than 
an attempt to make money. 

But Knkor would not let go of his victim, who must be 
used as an asset. “But you’re also an artist, a musician, a virtu- 
oso. Haven’t you given concerts?” 

The young man’s hand was raised in self-defence: “That’s 
not quite right. Among other things I’ve been an accom- 
panist. One must try all kinds of things.” His eyes sought 
Juliette’s assistance. 

She marvelled: “How small the world really is. How strange 
that I should have met a compatriot here. You’re half French.” 

Thanks to Juliette’s verve the evening was a very successful 
one, not to be compared with former gatherings in Villa 
Bagradian. Most of these rustic Armenians lived Orientally, 
that is to say they foregathered only in church or in the 

57 



street Visits were for state occasions. This cloistered domes- 
tiaty was the true cause of the women's uneasiness. But this 
evening they thawed, little by litdc. The pastor’s wife forgot 
to warn her husband, whose life she devoted her energies to 
prolonging, and whose sleep must therefore never be en- 
croached upon, that it was tune to go home. The mukhtar’s 
wife had come dose up to Juliette, to finger the silk of her 
dress. Maink Antaram, however, had suddenly vanished. Her 
husband had sent a small boy to fetch her, since he needed 
her hdp in a difficult delivery. It was one of her duties to 
chase away the old spey-women, who at every childbirth 
besieged a house to sell magic potions to the mother. In the 
course of decades Madame Altouni had become the doctor’s 
valued assistant and had ended by taking over most of his 
pracuce. “She’s better at it than I am,” he always said. 

The host took longest to unbend. But little by little he grew 
convivial. He eyed discontentedly the long table laid with 
plates of cakes, tea and coffee cups, and two carafes of raki. 
He sprang to his feet. “My friends, we must have something 
better than this to drink.” He went down to the cellar witli 
Kristaphor and Missak to fetch up wine. The younger Avetis 
had laid down an ample store of the best years’ vintages. The 
steward had charge of them. It is true that the heady wines 
of Musa Dagh did not keep long. This may have been because 
they were not bottled, but kept, in accordance with old tradi- 
tion, in big scaled jars. It was a dark golden drink, very heady, 
similar to the wines which fiourish at Xara on Lebanon. 

When they had filled their glasses, Bagradian rose to give a 
toast. It came out as uncertainly and ominously as cverythmg 
else he had said that evening: It was good that they should 
all be situng here, happy, tonight. Who could tell whether 
next time, or the time ^tcr that, they would suU be so care- 
free! But nobody must let such thoughts spoil his evening. 
They brought no good with them. . . . 

This toast, or rather this veiled warning, Gabriel had given 

58 



in Armenian. Juliette raised her glass and looked across at 
him. “I could understand every word you said. But why so 
gloomy, my dear?” 

“I’m such a bad sptakcr,” he excused himself. “I should 
never have made a leader of the people.” 

“Rafael Patkanian,” the apothecary interjected, turning to 
Juliette, “Patkanian was one of our greatest popqjidr leaders, 
a real inspirer of the Armenian people — ^and he was the worst 
speaker you could imagine. He stuttered worse than the 
young Demosthenes. As a young man I had the honour of 
knowing and hearing him speak. In Erivan.” 

“You mean,” Gabriel laughed, “that everything’s possible.” 

The heady wine was producing its effect. Tongues wagged. 
Only the schoolteacher Oskaman still kept the embittered, 
dignified silence due to himself and his importance. Nokhud- 
ian, the man of God, who carried his liquor poorly, defended 
his glass against the onslaughts of his spouse as she tried to 
take it away from him. He kept saying: “Why, woman, this 
is a feast day, isn’t it?” 

As Gabriel opened a window for a glance at the night, he 
felt Juhette behind his back. 

“Are you having a nice time?” she whispered. 

He put his arm about her waist. “Whom have I to thank 
for it, if not you?” But his strained voice was unsuitcd to the 
loving words. 

Wine brought the desire for song. Several people pointed 
out a young man, one of the teachers — a. disciple of Krikor. 
His name was Asayan. This wisp of a man was known to 
have an excellent voice and memory for Armenian songs. 
Asayan showed all the diffidence of amateurs. He couldn’t 
possibly sing without accompaniment, and his house was too 
far away to fetch a tar. Juliette had already thought of sendmg 
upstairs for her gramophone; to be sure most of the natives 
of Yoghonoluk already knew this triumph of technical skill. 
But it was Krikor who settled the matter, with a significant 

59 



glance at his foreign guest: “We have a professional among 
us.” 

It did not need too much persuasion to make Gonzague 
Maris sit down to the piano. “One of the twelve pianos in 
Syria,” announced Gabriel. “It was sent from Vienna for my 
mother a quarter of a century ago. But Kristaphor tells me 
that my brother Avetis had an expert in from Aleppo to tunc 
it and put it to rights. In the last weeks of his life he played a 
good deal. And I never even knew he was musical.” 

Gonzague struck a few chords. But, as often happens, the 
professional could not find the right tune for this late hour, 
the unusual relaxation, the need these people felt to be amused. 
Carelessly, his head bent forward over the keys, he sat there, 
cigarette in mouth — but his fingers became more and more 
involved in macabre sounds. “Out of tune,” he murmured, 
“horribly out of tune,” and was perhaps for that reason unable 
to disentangle himself from howhng discords. A veil of bore- 
dom and faugue descended upon his face, which had looked 
so handsome. Bagradian quietly observed this face; it seemed 
no longer boyishly shy, but dissipated and disingenuous. He 
looked round for Juliette, who had pulled her chair nearer the 
piano. Her face was suddenly sagging and middle-aged. Softly 
she answered his questioning expression; “Headache.— It 
comes from this wine.” 

Gonzague suddenly stopped, and shut down the piano-lid. 
“Please excuse me.” 

Although, to let the others see he was musical, Shatakhian 
began in highly techmcal language to praise the foreigner’s 
playing, the evemng was really at an end. Pastor Nokhudian’s 
wife a few minutes later set the example for breaking up. To 
be sure they were to stay the night with friends in Yoghono- 
luk, but they must set out for Biuas at sunrise. The «ilen» 
Oskanian stayed on longest. When the others were already in 
the park, he turned back, to approach Juhette on his short 

6o 



kgs, so resolutely, so severely, that she felt a little scared. But 
he had only come to present her with a big and imposing 
manuscript roll, written in difierent coloured inks, in Ar- 
menian letters, before he vanished. 

It was a passionate rhymed declaration of love. 

Juliette awoke in the night to find Gabriel sitting bolt up- 
right at her bedside. He had hghted his candle and for some 
time must have been watching her asleep. She could distinctly 
feel that his eyes, not the candlelight, had awakened her. 

He touched her arm. “1 didn’t mean to wake you. But I 
wanted you to wake up.” 

She shook back her hair. Her face was amiable and re- 
freshed. “I shouldn’t have minded your waking me. You 
know that. You know I always like to talk in the night.” 

“I’ve been thinking things out . . .” His voice was hesitant. 

“And I’ve been having a simply marvellous sleep. So my 
headache can’t have come from your Armenian wine. It must 
have been brought on by the playing of my— comment dire? 
—my semKompatriot. What a coincidence! Fancy using 
Yoghonoluk as a spa, and Monsieur Knkor’s house as a hotel. 
But the funniest one of all was that litde black-haired school- 
teacher who gave me his rolled-up poem. And that other 
teacher, drawling through his nose. He seemed to think he was 
speaking such good French — ^and it sounded like a mixture 
of stones being ground and whining dogs. You Armemans 
have such a funny accent. Even you, mon amt, have it slighdy. 
Oh, well, I mustn’t be too critical! They’re really such nice 
people.” 

“Poor people. Poor, poor people.” 

Juliette had never observed the least sentimentality in 
Gabriel. All the greater, therefore, her astonishment. She 
looked across at him in silence. The candle behind his head 
made her unable to study his face; she could see only the upper 

6i 



half of his body, like a dark mass of carved stone. But Gabriel 
— since now, not only candlelight, but the first starry dawn- 
light fell upon Juhette — was in the presence of a tenderly 
radiant being. “Fourteen years in October. The greatest hap- 
piness in my life. And yet it was a bad mistake. I ought never 
to have dragged you away . . . thrust you into a foreign 
destmy.” 

She felt for matches to light her own candle. But he snatched 
her hand and prevented it. So that again she heard him speak 
through the formless dark. “It would be best if you could 
escape. . . . We ought to divorce.” 

A long silence. It simply did not occur to Juliette that this 
mad, incomprehensible suggestion had any serious reality. 
She shifted nearer him. “Have I hurt you, wounded your feel- 
ings, made you jealous?” 

“You’ve never been so kind as you were tonight. It’s years 
since I’ve felt so much in love. . . . That makes it all the 
more horrible.” 

He sat up more stiffly, so that the dark mass of his body 
looked stranger still. “Juhett^ you must take what I’m going 
to say seriously. Ter Haigasun will do whatever he can to get 
a divorce put through as fast as possible. And the Turkish 
authorities don’t put many obstacles in the way of that sort 
of thing. Then you’d be free, you’d have ceased to be an Ar- 
menian, you could get away from the ghastly fate of my peo- 
ple, in which I’ve involved you. We could go to Aleppo. There 
you can place yourself under the protecuon of a European con- 
sul, the American, or the Swiss, it doesn’t matter. And you’ll 
be safe, whatever happens here— or there. Stephan’ll go with 
you. You’ll be able to leave Turkey without difficulty. Of 
course I’ll make over my property and the income to 
you. . . .” 

He had said all this with difficulty, but quickly, so that she 
should not interrupt. But Juliette’s face came close to his. 
“And are you really taking this madness seriously?" 

62 



“If I’m still alive when it’s all over, I’ll come back to you.” 

“But yesterday we were quietly discussing what was to hap- 
pen when you got called up. . . 

“Yesterday? Yesterday was all an illusion. The world’s 
changed smee.” 

“What’s changed? This busmess with the passports? We 
shall be given new ones. Why, you yourself said that in 
Antioch you heard nothing terrible.” 

“I heard all kinds of disturbmg things — but that’s not the 
point. Perhaps, really, very little may have changed. But it 
always comes suddenly, like a desert storm. It’s in my bones. 
My ancestors in me, who suffered incredible things, can feel 
it. My whole body feels it. No, Juhette, you can’t understand! 
Nobody could understand who hasn’t been hated because of 
his race.” 

Juliette jumped out of bed, sat down beside him, and took 
his hands. “You’re just like Stephan. Whenever he’s had a bad 
dream, he only half wakes up and can’t shake it off for the 
next hour. Why should we ourselves be in danger? What 
about all your Turkish friends, those charming, sensitive peo- 
pie we knew in Pans, who called so often? Have they sud- 
denly changed into cunning wild beasts ? No. You Armenians 
have always been unjust to the Turks.” 

“I’m not being unjust to them. There are some very fine 
people among them. After all, m the war I got to know the 
poor people, how good and patient they are. It isn’t their 
fault and it isn’t ours. But what difference does that make?” 

The dawnlight had kept increasmg; the crest of Musa Dagh, 
beyond the windows, had begun to sharpen. Gabriel stared up 
at the mountain. “I’ve been thinkuig how odd it is that we 
should have come here in pursuit of Avetis, who kept escap- 
ing us. As though he’d meant to lure me to Yoghonoluk by 
his death. . . . But no — really it was you who insisted on 
coming here.” 

It was getting chilly. Juliette’s bare feet were freezing. She 

63 



did not want to argue. “Well — ^you seel It was just my ob- 
stinacy. That ought to calm you.” 

But Gabncl’s thoughts were pursuing another object. “Yes- 
terday, for an instant, I felt unshakably convinced that I’d 
been brought here by some supernatural power, that God has 
something or other in store for me. My feeling really was un- 
shakable, though It only lasted an instant. The life I’ve been 
leading so far can’t have been right. It’s so pleasant to imagine 
oneself an exceptional personage — the only grain in a wheat 
sheaf, not subject to the law of gravity, but free to wander, 
without obligations. . . . And so, by His will, through Avetis, 
God brought me back here. . . 

He stopped. For some time she had been peering into his 
indistinct face. “This is the fust time I’ve seen you afraid.” 

Still he did not turn away his eyes from the sharpening 
crest of Musa Dagh. "Afraid.^ As I should be of anything 
supernatural. As a child I used sometimes to imagine a tiny 
star in the sky growing bigger and bigger, swelling up, com- 
ing nearer and nearer, and crushing the earth.” 

He shook himself to regain his self-control. “Juliette. It’s not 
for me. It’s for you and Stephan.” 

Then at last she got very angry. "I simply don’t believe in 
all your bogies. This is 1915. I’ve never met with anything in 
Turkey, or anywhere else, but friendship and civility. I’m not 
frightened of people. But, even suppose there should be dan- 
ger, do you really think I’d be such a low-down coward as to 
run away and leave you here to face iti* ... I couldn’t even 
do that if I’d stopped loving you.” 

He said no more and shut his eyes. Juliette already wanted 
to get up quietly. But Gabriel let his head sink into her lap. 
His forehead was damp and cold. In a sudden burst the birds 
struck up their shrill dawn twitterings. 


64 



The First Incident 


4 


This sudden weakness and surrender passed as quickly as it 
had come. Yet Gabriel was transformed since that day in 
Antioch. He, who for hours together had worked in his room, 
had now begun only to sleep at home. But then he was so 
ured out that he slept like a corpse. He did not say another 
word of the menace which had shaken him so profoundly that 
Sunday night. Juliette, too, avoided the subject. She was con- 
vinced that there was really nothing to fear. Already, in the 
course of their marriage, she had been through three or four 
such crises with Gabriel — days of depressed, apparently cause- 
less brooding, of heavy silences, which no affection served to 
dissipate. She knew it of old. At such times a wall grew up 
between them, and they were strangers, so unapproachable 
to each other that Juliette felt appalled at the childish reckless- 
ness which had let her join her destiny to this strange blood; 

To be sure, in Pans things had been different for Juhette; 
Her own world, in which Gabriel was the foreigner, had sun- 
ported her like a higher power. In Yoghonoluk their posidons 
were reversed, and it is very easily understood that Juliette, 
for all her irony, should have striven to fortify in herself her 
feeling of being well disposed towards the “half<ivilized” peo- 
ple with whom she was living. 

Gabriel must be left to his own devices. That painful talk in 
the night seemed no more to Juliette than one of the moods 
she already knew. For this Frenchwoman, grown up amid im- 
measurable security, could not imagine in the least what 

65 



.Gabriel had meant by bs “desert storm.” Europe was now a 
battlefield. Even in Pans people were having to spend the 
night in cellars, takmg refuge from enemy aircraft. But here 
she lived amid paradisaic spring. A few more months of tbs 
would be delightful. Then, sooner or later, they would be sure 
to return to the Avenue Kleber — and meanwble Juliette’s days 
were fully, and very pleasandy, occupied. She had not the 
time to do much thinking. Her ambitions as a chatelaine were 
aroused. These servants must be trained to civilization. She 
soon found herself admiring the natural talents of Armenians; 
witbn a few weeks Hovhanncs, the cook, had developed into 
almost a cordon bleu. The butler, Missak, was so versatile that 
she had thoughts of taking bm back with her to Paris. Her 
two maids bade fair to become expert ladies’ maids. The viUa 
on the whole was in good condiuon, yet sharp feminine eyes 
could pick out many points where decay and ddapidation 
tbeatened. Workmen invaded the house. Their master, To- 
masian, undertook to do all the carpentering. But Tomasian 
must never be called a master-carpenter to bs face. He de- 
scribed himself as a “builder and contractor,” wore a heavy 
gold watch-chain across bs middle, hung with a big medabon 
of his late wife, that had been painted by the schoolteacher 
Oskanian, and never let slip a chance of tclhng people how 
bs two children, a son and a daughter, had been to school in 
Geneva. He was tediously thorough and msisted on engaging 
Juliette in endless discussions. In compensation, however, he 
succeeded in repairing any structural damage the house had 
sustamed and could even make certain additions and im- 
provements necessary to European habits. His men worked 
fast and with astonisbng quiet. By the beginning of April, 
Juliette was already proudly aware that here, on the remotest 
coast of Syria, she possessed a country house wbch, apart 
from its rather primitive lighting and samtation, could easily 
compare with any in Europe. 

Her cbef delights were the rose garden and orchard. Here 

66 



her inherited instincts found expression. Is there not in 
every Frenchman an inborn gardener and fruit-grower? But 
Armenians also are born gardeners, especially those round 
Musa Dagh. Knstaphor, the steward, was an expert. Juliette 
had never conceived of such fruit. No one, without having 
tasted them, can have any idea of the sweetness and juiciness 
of Armenian apricots. Even here, beyond the watershed of the 
Taurus, they retained all the savour of their home up along 
the shores of Lake Van, so rich in gardens. Juliette kept mak- 
ing the acquaintance of more and more new kinds of fruit, of 
flowers and vegetables of which she had never heard. She 
spent most time in pruning rose trees, on her head a sombrero, 
a vast pair of Kristaphor’s gardening-scissors in her hand. 
For such a rose-lover the dehghts of this could not have been 
equalled. Long beds of rose trees, shrub after shrub, tree after 
tree, not in stiflE European hnes, but a tangled tumult of scent 
and colour, on dark green waves. 

Apothecary Knkor had promised that, if she would send 
him enough baskets of the real moschata damascena, he would 
extract for her a tiny vial of that attar, the receipt for which 
goes back through the centuries. And he told her a legend. 
A single drop of the genuine essence has such power that a 
corpse, on to whose hair it has been sprinkled, will still be 
perfumed with it at the Last Judgment, and so will influence 
the recording angel in his favour. 

Sometimes Juliette went for rides with Stephan. Behind 
them rode a stable-boy, for whom she had designed pic- 
turesque livery. The instinct to embellish, to decorate, pos- 
sessed her completely. When she rode forth with Stephan and 
the decorative groom down the village street and across the 
church square of Yoghonoluk, she felt like the princess of this 
fairy-tale world. She sometimes thought of h^ mother and 
sister in Paris. What a much better time she was bavingl 
Wherever she went, she was greeted with the deepest 
obusanc^ even in the Mohammedan villages, which she 

67 



touched oa her longer rides. It was obvious. Poor Gabriel had 
another of his crises de nerfs. She, Juliette, could see not the 
slightest agn of a changed world. 

Gabriel Bagradian left the house early every morning, but 
no longer to explore Musa Dagh. He went trough the vil- 
lages. His hankerings after memories of his childhood had 
been replaced by more adult cravings. He was determined to 
get to know these people thoroughly, their way of lif^ their 
needs, their comings and goings. 

At the same time he had sent a batch of letters to Istanbul, 
to Armeman friends in the Dashnakzagan party, and some to 
former friends among the Young Turks. He shrewdly hoped 
that, though the metropohtan censorship might prevent most 
of these from being delivered, some at least would get to their 
destination. The answers that came must decide the future. 
If everything was as usual in the capital, or if it were simply 
a case of general military control, he would, he had decided, 
break up this household and dare the journey to Istanbul, 
even without the necessary passport. If no answers came, or 
unfavourable ones, the old Agha’s fears must be well founded, 
his fate sealed, retreat cut off. Then there would remain only 
the hope that such a friend of Armenians as the Wall Djelal 
Bey might tolerate no “incidents” in his vilayet, and that a 
peasant community like this round Musa Dagh would be left 
unmolested by the firebrands, who, after all, congregate in big 
cities. In that case the house in Yoghonoluk might, as the Agha 
had said, be an ideal refuge. 

In so far as the absence of marching-orders was mnrf rnrd, 
Bagradian fancied he could perceive the exact wor king s of 
the minds of the Turkish Hig^ Command. Why were Arme- 
nians being retired from the hnc and disarmed? Surely the 
Turks feared that defeat would mean that a strong minority, 
armed with aU the latest weapons, might be tempted to de- 
mand certain rights from the dominant race. But where there 

68 



could be no soldiers, officers, who at the proper moment might 
snatch up the leadership of such a movement, were sdll less 
to be tolerated. 

Valid as were all these reasons, Gabriel had not a second’s 
real peace. Yet now his unrest was no longer neurotically on 
edge, but fruitful and purposeful. He hiund in himself a me> 
ticulous sense of detail, so far known only in his scientific 
work. It was useful as a means of discovering exact relation* 
ships. He did not once ask himself to what object his new 
exertions were being directed or to whom he imagined they 
might be useful. 

His first step was to investigate the village of Yoghonoluk. 
It was the largest village. In its communal house the municipal 
business of all seven villages was transacted, particularly their 
dealings with the authorities. Mukhtar Kebussyan was away. 
The village clerk let Gabriel m with many bows; a visit from 
the head of the fabulous Bagradian family was a great dis- 
tinction. 

Was there a register? The clerk pointed ceremoniously to, 
the dusty shelves round the walls of his little office. Naturally 
there were lists. And not only had every inhabitant been, 
entered in the proper church register — ^these were not Kurds 
or nomads, but Christian folk — only a few years ago the 
mukhtars had taken an independent census. In 1909— after thej 
reaction against the Young Turks and the big massacre in 
Adana — Armenian party leaders had given orders for hsts to 
be taken in the villages. By a rough calculation there must be 
about seven thousand Christians. But if the Eilendi so desired, 
he could have the exact figures within a few days. Gabriel did 
so desire. 

His next mquu’y-was more dchcate. How were those young 
men placed who were liable for military service? The village 
clerk had begun to squint a little, like his master, the muldh' 
tar. So far the order had concerned all able-bodied men be- 
tween twenty and thirty, though legally twenty-seven was the 

69 



age-limit. About two hundred men in this whole village dis- 
trict had been affected. Just one hundred and fifty of these had 
paid theur bedel, the sum which bought them clear of the 
army — fifty Turkish pounds a head. The Effendi knew how 
thrifty people were in the villages. Most fathers began to save 
for the bedel the instant their sons were born ... to spare 
them the horrors of Turkish barrack-life. The Mukhtar of 
Yoghonoluk, in conjunction with the gendarmerie station, 
had to collect it as every batch received its marching-orders 
and pass it on to the Hukumet at Antioch. 

"But how is it,” Bagradian asked, “that in a population of 
six thousand there should only be two hundred men fit for 
service?” 

The answer did not come as a surprise. The Effendi must 
remember that this lack of able-bodied men was a legacy from 
the past, a consequence of the blood-letting to which, at least 
once every decade, the Armeman people was subjected. But 
that was only a euphenusm. Gabriel himself had seen over 
two hundred young men in the village streets. There were 
other ways of avoiding conscription, without having to pay 
the bedel. The pock-marked saptieh, Ah Nassif, was no doubt 
fully conversant with these other methods. 

Bagradian came back to the point; “Well, then . . . Fifty 
people were sent to barracks in Antakiya. What’s happened to 
them?” 

“Forty were kept for service.” 

“And in which regiments, on what fronts, would they be 
serving?” 

That was uncertain. It was weeks, months, now, since the 
families had had news of their sons. The reliability of the 
Turkish field-post was all too well known. Possibly they were 
in barracks in Aleppo, where General Jemal Pasha was re- 
conditioning his army. 

“And docs nobody say in the villages that they’re going to 

70 



use the Armenians as inshaat taburi, as depot soldiers?” 

“They say all kinds of things m the villages.” The clerk 
looked rather uneasy as he answered. 

Gabriel eyed the httle bookcase. A List of Householders 
stood next a copy of the Imperial Ottoman Boo\ of haws, 
and next that a pair of rusty scales for weighing letters. He 
turned suddenly: “What about deserters?” 

The harassed village clerk tip-toed to the door, opened and 
shut it again mysteriously. Of course there were deserters, here 
as everywhere. Why shouldn’t Armenians desert, when Turks 
were setting them the example? How many? Fifteen to 
twenty. Yes! They’d been after them, too. A few days ago. A 
mixed platoon of saptiehs and regular infantry, led by a 
mulasim. They’d looked all over Musa Dagh. Made fools of 
themselves. 

The pointed face of the blinking little man was suddenly 
craftily triumphant. “Fools of themselves, Effendi. You see, 
our lads know their own mountam.” 

Ter Haigasun’s presbytery was the third best house in the 
church square of Yoghonoluk. Only the mukhtar’s house and 
the school buildings could compare with it. With its flat 
roof and single-stoned, flve-wmdowed fa9ade, it might have 
stood in any small town in the south of Italy. Ter Haigasun 
was Gregorian chief priest to the whole district. His province 
even included hamlets with mixed inhabitants and the small 
Armenian communities in such Turkish towns as Suedia and 
El Eskel. Ter Haigasun had studied in the seminary at 
Ejmiadzm, at the feet of the Catholicos, in whom all Arme- 
nian Christianity acclaimed its chief spiritual head, and was 
therefore in every way the chosen vicar of his district. 

And Pastor Harutiun Nokhudian? How did a Protestant 
pastor suddenly come to inhabit such a remote Armenian vil- 
lage? The answer is that Syria and Anatolia contained a great 

7 * 



many Protestants and that the Evangelical church had those 
German and American missionaries who had cared so well for 
Armenian orphans and victims to thank for these proselytes. 
The worthy Nokhudian had been such an orphan, sent by 
these compassionate mission-folk to Dorpat in East Germany 
to study theology. But in everything that was not of strictly 
spiritual concern Nokhudian submitted to Ter Haigasun. In 
View of the constant danger besetting Armenians theological 
differences became of comparative unimportance, and Ter 
Haigasun’s spiritual leadership— he was, in the truest sense, a 
spiritual leader — remained uncontested and uncnticized. 

An old man, the sacristan, led Gabriel into the priest’s study. 
A bare room with a wide carpet. Against the window a small 
writing-desk with, beside it, a tattered, straw-seated chair for 
visitors. Ter Haigasun stood up behind the desk and came 
round it a step nearer Bagradian. He could not have been 
.more than forty-eight, yet his beard had long grey streaks on 
cither side. His big eyes (Armenian eyes arc nearly always 
big; big with a thousand years of terror) had a mingled look 
of shy isolation and resolute knowledge of the world. The 
priest was wearing a black alpaca cassock with a hood that 
rose to a point over his head. His hands were hidden in wide 
sleeves, as though they were freezing even on this warm, 
spring day. Was it a shiver of humility'* Bagradian sat down 
carefully on the rickety straw-seated chair. 

“I much regret the fact, reverend Father, that I am never 
able to greet you at my house.” 

The priest cast down his eyes; both hands waved a gesture 
of apology. “I regret it even more than you, Effendi. But Sun- 
day evenmg is the only time we priests have free in the whole 
week.” 

Gabriel looked about him. He had hoped in this presbytery 
study to End some documents and records. Nothing at all. 
Only a few written papers on the desk. “I can well believe 
that you carry a heavy burden.” 

72 



Ter Haigasun did not deny it. 

Gabriel tried to arrest the eyes o£ the priest. “Don’t you 
agree, Ter Haigasun, that these are not the days for social 
gatherings?” 

A brief, attentive glance was his reply. “On the contrary, 
Effendi. This is the right time for people to come together.” 

Gabriel at first said nothing in answer to these strange 
words with their double meaning. It was a while before he 
observed: “It really is surprising that hfe here should go on 
so calmly, and that nobody seems to be perturbed.” 

Again the priest was sitting with downcast eyes, as though 
he were prepared to accept any scorn with humility. 

“I was in Antioch a few days ago,” Gabriel very slowly ob- 
served, “where I heard a good deal.” 

Ter Haigasun’s freezing hands slipped out of his sleeves. 
He joined his finger-tips. “The people in our villages only very 
seldom go to Antioch. And that is good. They live within their 
own boundaries and know httlc of things in the world out- 
side.” 

"How long will they still be able to live at peace in their 
own boundaries. Ter Haigasun? . . . What will happen, for 
instance, if all our leaders and rich men in Istanbul get ar^ 
rested?” 

“They have already been arrested,” the priest answered very 
softly. “For the last three days they have been in the prisons 
of Istanbul. And they are many, very many.” 

So that Gabriel’s fate was sealed, the way to the capital 
blocked. Yet for the moment this major fact impressed him 
less than Ter Haigasun’s calm. He had no doubt that the 
news was reliable. The clergy, m spite of the liberal Dashnak- 
zagan, was still the one great power, the only real organization 
of the people. The priest was the first to learn, by quick and 
secret ways, of any new and dangerous factor, long before the 
newspapers of the capital had dared report it. Gabriel wanted 
to convmce himself that he really had understood. 

73 



“Actually arrested? And who? . . .'Are you perfectly 
sure?” 

“I’m certain.” 

“And yet you, the head priest of seven large villages, keep so 
calm?” 

“Excitement would be of no use and would probably only 
injure my people.” 

“Have any priests been arrested^" 

Ter Haigasun doubtless perceived the guile m this question. 
He nodded gravely. “Seven, so far. Among them Archbishop 
Hemayak and three highly placed prelates.” 

For all this devastating news Gabriel craved a agarette. He 
was given one, and a light. “I ought to have come to see you 
before, Ter Haigasun. You have no idea how hard it has been 
to keep silence.” 

“You did very well to keep silence. And we must continue 
to keep it.” 

“Would it perhaps be better to prepare these people for 
what may happen?” 

Ter Haigasun’s face, as though carved in wax, showed no 
emotion. “I can't tell what may happen. But I know the dan- 
gers of panic in a commumty.” 

This Christian priest had spoken to almost the same effect 
as had Rifaat, the pious Moslem. But in Gabriel’s mind a 
lightning vision came and went; a huge dog. One of those 
stray mad curs that make all Turkey dangerous ground. An 
old man on a road, stopping in terror of the dog, swaying 
on his feet, and turning, with a sudden jerk, for flight-^ut 
already the rabid fangs are m his back. . . . Gabrid passed 
his hand across his forehead. 

“Fear,” he said, “is the surest way of exciting our enemy to 
slaughter us. But isn’t it rather sinfcl, and perhaps even more 
dangerous, to keep the people ignorant of their fate? How 
bng can the secret be kept?” 

Ter Haigasun seemed to be listemng into the distance. “The 

74 



papers are still not allowed to report these things, so that 
foreign countries may not know anything of them. And in the 
spring there’s so much work to do that our people have no 
time and scarcely go anywhere. So that, with God’s help, we 
can be spared anxiety for some little while. But one day it will 
come. Sooner or later . . .” 

“Will come.? How do you see it coming?’’ 

“I don’t see anything.” 

“Our soldiers disarmed? Our leaders arrested?” 

Ter Haigasun, in the same quiet voice, as though it gave 
him secret pleasure to torment both himself and his listener, 
concluded his story. “They have even arrested Vartkes, the 
bosom friend of Talaat and Enver. Some of them have been 
deported. They may be dead by now. All Armenian news- 
papers have been shut down, all Armenian shops and busi- 
nesses closed. And, as we sit here, there are fifteen innocent 
Armenian men hanging on fifteen gallows on the square be- 
fore the Seraskeriat.” 

Bagradian rose so excitedly that he overturned the straw- 
seated chair. “What’s the real meaning of all this madness? 
Can you make it out?” 

“I can only see that the government is planning such a 
stroke against our whole people as even Abdul Hamid never 
dared.” 

Gabriel glared as angrily at Ter Haigasun, as though he 
had been faced with an enemy, a member of Imhad. “Are we 
really so helpless? Must we really hold out our heads to the 
noose in silence?” 

“We are helpless. We must bow our heads. We may perhaps 
be allowed to cry out.” 

This damned East, with its kismet, Bagradian thought in a 
flash of rage. At the same instant his consciousness was in- 
vaded by a thousand names, connexions, possibilities — poli- 
ticians, diplomats, his personal friends, Frenchmen, English- 
men, Germans, Scandinavians. They must arouse the whole 

75 



worldl But how? The trap had closed. The mists returned. 
His words came out very subdued. “Europe won’t stand for 
it” 

“You see it through foreign eyes.” Ter Haigasun’s passive 
calm was unendurable. “There are two Europes. The Germans 
need the Turkish government more than it needs them. And 
the others can’t help us.” 

Gabriel stared at the priest, whose alert cameo-like face 
nothing could disturb. “You arc the spiritual father of thou- 
sands of souls” — Bagradian’s voice had almost a mditary sharp- 
ness — “and your whole skill consists in the ability to withhold 
the truth from people, just as we hide it from children, or the 
old, to spare them. Is that all you can do for your flock? What 
else can you do?” 

The attack seemed to have pierced the priest to the quick. 
His hands on the table slowly clenched. His chin sank on to 
his chest. 

“I pray . . .” Ter Haigasun whispered, as though ashamed 
of letting be seen by a stranger the spiritual struggle which 
day by day he waged with God for the safety of his flock Per- 
haps this grandson of Avetis Bagradian was a freethinker, a 
scoffer. But Gabriel paced the room, breathing heavily. He 
struck the wall with the flat of his hand, suddenly, so hard 
that plaster came flaking down. “Pray then, Ter Haigasun” — 
and still hkc an officer giving an order — “pray . . . But God 
has to be reinforced.” 

The first incident which revealed these secret happenings to 
Yoghonoluk occurred that very same day. It was a warm, 
cloudy day in April. 

Gabriel, at Stephan’s request, had had a few roughly car- 
pentered gymnasium fittings set up in the park. Stephan was 
naturally athletic. His father often joined his exercises. Shoot- 
ing at the target was their favourite, though Juliette, to be sure, 
preferred croquet. Today, immediately after lunch, at which 

76 



Gabriel had still not said a word, Avakian, Stephan, and his 
father went out to the range set up outside the park enclosure 
on a little woody hillock of Musa Dagh. There Gabriel had 
had a transverse gully, about fifty feet long, cleared of its 
undergrowth. Under a high oak there was a lymg-board 
wedged down into the soil, from which to aim at tlie target 
fixed to a tree at the farther end of the gully. Avetis had left 
his brother well supplied with arms — a box of eight hunting- 
rifles of various patterns, two Mauser infantry rifles, and a full 
supply of ammunition. 

Gabriel was a fairly good shot, but for five cartridges he 
got only one bull’s eye. The very short-sighted Avakian kept 
clear of the contest, so as not to put too hard a strain on his 
pupil’s respect. But Stephan proved a crack shot, since, of 
seven cartridges fired out of the smallest of the hunting-rifles, 
six pierced the playing-card which served as bull’s eye to the 
target, and four hit the face of the figure. It excited Stephan 
greatly to beat his father. He would have liked to go on shoot- 
ing till the evening, had Gabriel not suddenly broken off: 
“That’s enough.” 

Gabriel’s state of mind was one he had never before expe- 
rienced. He could not think of anything quite like it. He felt 
insipid. His tongue was dry and heavy m his mouth. His 
hands and feet were cold. All the blood seemed to have left 
his head. But these were the mere outward signs of some 
change at the very centre of his being. “I don’t feel ill,” he re- 
flected, having waited some time to see what would happen. 
“All 1 feel IS that I’d like to get out of my skin, strip oS my 
body.” At the same instant came the senseless longing to run 
away, far away from this, no matter where. “Let’s go for a 
short walk together,” he decided. He did not want to be left 
alone. If they left him, he would have to walk on and on m 
short, quick steps, farther and farther, and never turn round 
till he had walked right out of the world. 

Avakian undertook to carry the rifles back to the house. 

77 



The son and father left the park and went down the road to 
Yoghonoluk, not ten minutes’ walk. Suddenly Gabriel felt 
like a very old man, his body so heavy that he leant on 
Stephan. They could hear the noisy buzz of voices even be- 
fore they came into the church square. 

Armenians, in contrast to Arabs and the other clamorous 
races of the East, are quietly reticent m public. Their anaent 
destiny in itself is enough to inhibit their taking part in noisy 
gatherings, or themselves producing them. But here and now 
about three hundred villagers had collected in a wide half- 
circle, besieging the church. Among these men and women, 
peasants and craftsmen, there were several who emitted long, 
hoarse objurgations and shook their fists. No doubt these 
curses were aimed at the saptiehs, whose shabby lambskin 
busbies rose above the heads of the crowd. Apparently these 
protectors of law and order were trying to clear a space before 
the church, so as to leave the steps and entrance free. Gabriel 
seized Stephan’s hand and forced a way through the shoal of 
people. At first they saw only a tall, ragged fellow, who had 
crowned his black cap with a straw wreath, and whose right 
hand waved the head of a sunflower, broken off short. This 
apparition, obeying some rhythm of its own, executed with 
deathly seriousness a dance of wearily thudding steps. But this 
was in no sense the dance of a drunkard; that was at once 
plain. 

The crowd did not even notice this dancer, waving his 
sunflower-head. Thar eyes were set on another picture. 

On the steps of the church four people squatted. A man, two 
young women, a little girl of twelve or thirteen. All four wae 
staring out into the distance with a dazed expression — their 
eyes seemed unaware of thar surroundings, of the excited 
crowd, the apothecary’s house immediately opposite. 

The man, still young, with a thin, crazed-looking, unshaven 
face, wore a long, grey alpaca cassock, of the kind worn here 
by Protestant pastors. His soft straw hat had rolled down the 

78 



steps. The ends of his trouser-legs were tattered. His broken 
boots, the thick coating of dust on his face and cloak, showed 
that he must have trudged for several days. The women, too, 
wore European dress, and not by any means the cheapest, as 
far as could be judged by their present state. The one sittmg 
beside the pastor — doubtless his wife — ^looked as though she 
might faint or go into convulsions at any minute, since sud- 
denly she fell backwards on to the steps and would have 
bumped her head against the stone had her husband not put 
out an arm to support her. This was the first, still strangely 
jerky movement of the group. 

The other woman, still in her earliest youth, looked beau- 
tiful, even in such a plight. Her httle face was thin and hvid, 
but the eyes had in them a feverish shimmer of vitality; the 
full, soft lips were parted, gasping for air. She was in obvious 
pain, must be wounded or have met with an acadent, since 
her left arm, which looked contorted, hung in a sling. Fmally 
the child, a perky, sparrow-like httle creature, had on the 
striped smock worn by children in orphanages. This little girl 
stretched her feet convulsively out from under her frock, ob- 
viously concerned to touch nothing with them. 

“Like a hurt animal,” Gabriel thought, “stretching its 
wounded paws away from its body.” And indeed the poor 
child’s feet looked very swollen, purple, and covered with open 
wounds. Only the dancer with the sunflower-head seemed 
sound of hmb and full of strength. 

An older man came runmng across the square. Apparendy 
he had been called away from his work, since he still had on 
a blue apron. Stephan recognized Tomasian the builder, who 
had supervised the improvements in the villa. Young Stephan 
had often loitered round him inquisitively, and Tomasian had 
proudly told him of Aram, his son, a very respected man in 
the town of Zeitun, a pastor, and the head of the orp’nanage 
there. So this must be the son, thought Stephan. Old Tomasian 
stopped, with raised inquiring arms, in &ont of the group. 

79 



Pastor Aram came back to his surroundings with di£Bculty, 
sprang to his feet with forced agility, and did his best to wear 
an appeasing smile, as though nothing very serious had hap- 
pened. The women, too, stood up, but not so easily, smce one 
had a broken arm and the other, it was apparent, expected a 
child. Only the little girl, in her striped orphanage smock, sat 
on, squinting suspiciously up at her fellow-sufferers. Impos- 
sible to make out the sense of their sudden questions and 
sounds of woe. But for an instant, as Pastor Aram embraced 
his father, he lost control. His head sagged on to the old 
man’s shoulder, and a short, hoarse sob of grief became fully 
audible. It came and went, and still the women did not speak. 
But It spread, like an electric shock, through the crowd. Whim- 
perings, sobs, loud clearings of the throat. Only oppressed 
and persecuted peoples are such good pain-conductors. What 
has befallen one has been done to all. Here, in the church 
square of Yoghonoluk, three hundred Armemans were shaken 
by a grief, the story of which they had not yet heard. Even 
Gabriel, the stranger, the Parisian, the cosmopolitan, who had 
long since overcome his origins — even he had to force down 
something which throttled him. He glanced surreptiuously 
at Stephan. The last tinge of colour had faded out of that 
crack marksman’s face, Juliette would have been starded, not 
only at her son’s pallor, but at the wild look of uncompre- 
hending horror in his eyes. She would have been scared to see 
her child look so Armenian. 

Meanwhile Dr. Altouni had joined the group, as well as 
Antaram Altouni, the two schoolmasters, who had been called 
away from their classes, the mukhtar Kebussyan, and, last of 
all. Ter Haigasun, just back from a visit to Bitias, on his 
donkey. The priest called out a few words in Turkish to the 
saptieh. All Nassif. None of the crowd were to be let into 
the church. He, however, bundled the Tomasian family and 
the little orphan through the door. 'The doctor and his wife^ 
the teachers, and the mukhtar followed. The crowd and th^ 

8o 



sunflower-dancer, who sank down on the steps ana went to 
sleep, remained in the square. 

Ter Haigasun led the exhausted people into the sacristy, a 
big, light room containing a divan and some church benches. 
The sacristan was sent for wine and hot water. The doctor and 
his wife got to work at once. The girl with the broken arm 
— ^Iskuhi Tomasian, the pastor’s sister — was examined. So 
were the wounded feet of Sato, the little orphan whom Pastor 
Aram had brought from Zeitun. 

Gabriel Bagradian stood apart, holding Stephan’s hand, a 
stranger — for the present at least. He listened to the confused 
questions, the bioken answers. Thus, bit by bit, he heard the 
disordered tale of Zeifdii, the tragic history of this town, of 
Pastor Aram, and of his flock. 

Zeitun is the name of an ancient hill town on the northern 
slopes of the CiLcian Taurus range. Like the villages around 
Musa Dagh, it was almost entirely inhabited by its original 
Armenian population. Smee, however, it was a town of some 
importance, of about thirty thousand mhabitants, the Turkish 
government had garrisoned it with considerable numbers of 
troops and .saptiehs, officers and officials, with their families — 
as they did wherever it seemed necessary to keep non-Turks 
under surveillance. Only such people as Bagiadian, whose 
fives had been spent m Pans or some other capital in the 
West, could still have hoped for any reconciliation of op- 
posites, any stilling of a hatred in the blood, or “triumph of 
Justice,” under the Young Turkish banner. Gabriel had once 
been friends with a certain number of journalists and lawyers 
whom the revolution had helped into the saddle. In the days 
of conspiracy he had sat up all night, arguing with them till 
dawn in Montmartre cafes, with assurances of eternal friend- 
ship, messianic prophcc,es of the future, cxclunged between 
Turks and Armenians. In defence of a fatherland with which 
he had had very little to do, he, a married man, went to the 

8i 



vvar — a notion which had not even occurred to most of the 
Turkish patriots m Pans. And now? Their faces were soil 
in his mind; some dame, still not quite extinguished, of remi- 
niscent friendship made him ask himself: “What? Can such 
old friends be my mortal enemies?” 

Zeitun was the crude answer. It should be pictured as a 
high, many-creviced rock, crowned by a savage-looking citadel, 
honeycombed with the streets of an ancient town. A haughtily 
repelling pyramid of ways piled one above the other, only its 
modern quarters spreading their tentacles a little way out into 
the plain. Zeitun had been a perpetual thorn in Turkish flesh. 
For the earth has both its holy places, its sites of pilgrimage, 
which frame the human mind to devotion, and its natural 
fortresses, redolent of hate and deflance, whose spirit is such 
as to rouse to seething-point the blood of an opposing racial 
fanaticism. In Zeitun such hate had its deflnite reasons. First, 
until far into the nineteenth century the city had governed 
itself. But more unpardonable still was the memory of its 
astounding conduct in the year 1896. 

In those days the good Sultan Abdul Hamid had called into 
being the Hamidiyehs — predatory bands of nomads, robbers, 
convicts, let out of jail for the purpose — with their sole object 
the formation of a troop of valiants restlessly bent on provok- 
ing “incidents,” with which he hoped to stop the mouths of 
the Armenian reformers. Everywhere else these bands were 
distinguished for their successes — ^in Zeitun only did they en- 
counter bloody defeat instead of achieving what had been 
promised them, an enjoyable and remunerative massacre. 
Worse still, even the battalion of regulars hurried to their as- 
sistance was driven back with heavy losses out of the narrow 
streets. Not even the siege with full armament following this 
rout brought the least success. Zeitun remained impregnably 
rebellious. When at last European diplomacy intervened on 
behalf of these brave Armemans, and ambassadors to the Sub- 
lime Porte, which, spattered with dishonour, had no alterfi a. 

82 



live, achieved full amnesty for Zeitun — the Turk set his teeth, 
abysmally humbled. 

All mihtary races, not only the Ottoman, have encountered 
defeat at the hands of their own bnd and forgotten it. But 
to have been beaten by a race of merchants and craftsmen, peo- 
ple whose ideal had never been military — a race of bookworms 
— ^it was more than any soldierly people can forget. So that the 
new government, now that the old had been disposed of, still 
had old scores to pay off in Zeitun. 

And what better chance of paying off old scores than the 
Great War? Martial law and a state of emergency were pro- 
claimed. Most young men of Zeitun were at the front or in 
distant barracks- Repeated house-to-house searches, in the 
earliest days of the war, had enurely disarmed such inhabit- 
ants as remained. 

Only one thing was lacking: a pretext. 

The mayor of Zeitun was a man named Nazareth Chaush. 
He was a typical Armenian mountaineer — haggard, bent, sal- 
low, with a drooping bushy moustache and a hooked nose. 
But he was aihng, no longer young, and had bng done his best 
to avoid election. He could scent the reek of future holocausts. 
The lines from his nostrils sharpened daily as he toiled up the 
steep hill to the Hukumet, to receive the latest orders of the 
Kaimakam. His hand, round a rough stick, was deformed by 
rheumatic knots. Nazareth Chaush was highly intelligent. He 
had seen at once that in future there could be only one policy 
— that of being on guard against provocation. Nothing should 
be allowed to cast any slur on the patriotic integrity of Arme* 
mans. All traps must be skilfully avoided. One was, and re- 
mained, a thoroughgoing Ottoman patriot. Not that Nazareth 
Chaush really bore any grudge against Turkey, nor did any 
other inhabitant of Zeitun. Turkey was the destiny of the race. 
It is futile to bicker with the earth on which one has to live, 
with the air one breathes. He cherished no childish dream of 
emancipation, since, after all, the choice lay between Tsar and 

83 



Sultan and it was as hard to make as it was superfluous. He 
remained in agreement with the words which had achieved a 
certain celebrity with Armenians: “Better perish physically in 
Turkey than spiritually in Russia.” There was no third way. 

A clearly defined line of conduct towards Turkish author!' 
ties was therefore laid down. The living example of their 
leader, Nazareth Chaush, forged iron discipline among the in* 
habitants of Zeitun. So far no longed-for “incident” had as- 
suaged the secret itch of the High Command. A medical 
board, eager for blood-letting, passed cripples and invahds 
for the army. Good! They reported for duty without a mur- 
mur. The Kaimakam imposed illegal taxes and war levies. 
Good! They were punctually supplied. This same Kaimakam 
used the most foolish pretexts for arranging victory celebra- 
tions and mass demonstrauons of patriotism. The townsfolk 
mustered in full force, their faces aglow with honest loyalty, 
to bawl the prescribed hymns and victorious anthems to the 
braying of Turkish army bands. 

So nothing was to be done along such lines. But what mass- 
provocation had failed to achieve might yet be managed by 
petty tyranny. Suddenly the caf&, the bazaar, every street and 
square, the inns of Zeitun, became infested with strange Ar- 
menians, soon on gossiping terms at every corner, taking a 
hand at cards and dominoes, even worming their way mto 
private houses, to bemoan with peculiar acrimony this intoler- 
able and increasing Turkish oppression. Such grains of sedi- 
tion as they could gather hardly paid these spies’ personal ex- 
penses. The first winter of war descended without one “inci- 
dent” having been angled out of the still waters of Zeitun, 
though a certain exalted quarter urgently needed one. At last 
the Kaimakam decided to take over the part of agent provo- 
cateur. 

It was Nazareth Chaush’s good fortune — or indeed, as things 
turned out, his bad — to have a very clumsy player to deal with. 
This Kaimakam was no blood-smeared tyrant, but a mediocre 

84 



poxy official in the style of the old regime, who, on the one 
hand, wanted a quiet hfe, on the other, to "keep in” with his 
superiors. These superiors began with the Mutessarif of the 
sanjak of Marash, to which the kazah of Zeitun was subordi- 
nate. This Mutessarif was a very sharp-eyed individual, a 
dauntless member of Ittihad, resolute to enforce without com- 
punction all decisions of Enver and Talaat as to the fate of the 
“accursed people” — even against the orders of his superior, 
the Wah of Aleppo, Djelal Bey. The Mutessarif overwhelmed 
the Kaimakam with questionnaires, warnings, acrid repri- 
mands. So that the portly chief justice of Zeitun — ^who would 
far rather have lived at peace with Armenians — ^found that he 
must trump up grounds of complaint, if only against a single 
prominent personality. It is the essence of a good negative 
civil servant that, having no character of his own, he should 
mirror that of any temporary superior. The Kaimakam there- 
fore addressed himself to the mukhtar, Nazareth Chaush, 
whom daily he invited to come to see him, overwhelmed with 
cordial civiliues, and even offered the chance of a very good 
busmess deal with the government. Not only did Chaush turn 
up punctually whenever he was required, but, with the most 
innocent expression, made the most of these business-like in- 
ducements. Naturally such constant visits gave rise to more 
and more heart-felt conversations. The chief justice kept as- 
suring the mayor how passionately fond he was of Arme- 
nians. Chaush begged him earnestly not to exaggerate: all peo- 
ples had their faults, and not least his compatriots. It was for 
Armenians to win their position in the fatherland by the 
services they rendered in the war. What newspapers did the 
mukhtar read to get the true account of the situauon? Only 
the Tamn, the official Ottoman newspaper, answered Chaush. 
And, as for truth, these were the days of world-shaking mili- 
tary events — surely truth was one of the prohibited weapons. 
The Kaimakam, in his helpless simplicity, grew plainer. He 
began to abuse Ittdiad, the power behind the power. (Probably 

85 



he meant what he was saying.) Nazareth Chaush was visibly 
horror-stricken. “They are great men, and great men always 
act for the best.” 

The Kaimakam lost his temper at being laughed at. “And 
Enver Pasha P What do you think of the Enver, Mukhtar?” 

“Enver Pasha is the greatest general of our ume. But what 
else can I think of him, EfEcndi?” 

The Kaimakam began to bhnk, whine, and implore. “Mukh- 
tar, be frank with me. Have you heard the Russians are ad- 
vanang?” 

“What are you saying, Efiendi? I don’t believe it. There’s 
nothing about it in the papers.” 

“Well, I tell you they arc. Be frank, Mukhtar. Wouldn’t 
that be the solution?” 

Nazareth Chaush interrupted, noisy with horror: “I warn 
you, Eifcndi. Such a highly placed man as you. Please say 
no more, in Heaven’s name. It sounds like high treason. But 
have no fear. Your word shall be buried within me.” 

When such ruses had failed, open aggression could not be 
far off. Naturally, even in Zeitun, and in the wild country 
surrounding it, there were “elements.” Their numbers, the 
longer the war lasted, kept being increased from without. Be- 
sides Armenians there were at least an equal number of Mo- 
hammedans escaped from the barracks at Marash. The jagged 
mountain range, Ala Kaya, was a safe and pleasant retreat for 
deserters of all kinds, or so the rumour went in all the bar- 
racks. But these deserters were inoffensive: apart from the 
usual country pilferings, they harmed nobody, were even 
anxious not to cause trouble. 

One day, however, a Turkish muleteer was attacked in the 
mountains, whether by deserters or others remained unknown. 
Some incredulous people even suggested that this lousy patriot 
had let himself be thrashed half to death for the baksheesh of 
the Imperial Ottoman government. In any case the man was 
discovered in a ditch, half unconscious. Here was the longed* 

86 



for “incident.” Mudirs and petty officials began to wear a 
look of inscrutability, all saptiehs were ordered to patrol the 
streets of Zeitun m pairs, and this time Nazareth Chaush 
was commanded, not invited, to attend the Kaimakam. 

Revoluuonary unrest, the Kaimakam mourned, seemed in- 
creasing to a most alarming extent. His superiors, in particular 
the Mutessarif of Marash, were demanding extra measures to 
deal with it. If he delayed any longer it would be all over 
with him. Therefore he counted implicitly on the help of his 
friend, Nazareth Chaush, so highly respected all over the dis- 
trict. It ought not to be difficult for the mukhtar, in the inter- 
ests of the whole Armenian people, to give up a few fire- 
brands and criminals; there must be a great many in the 
neighbourhood, even in the town itself. And here this clever 
man walked into the trap set by the stupid one. He ought to 
have said: “Effendi, I am at your orders and those of the 
Mutessarif. Command me, what I am to do.” Instead he made 
his first real blunder: “I know nothing of criminals or rev- 
olutionaries, Effendi.” 

“So you can’t even tell me the place where you hide your 
rabble to molest honest Turks in full daylight?” 

“Smce I know of no rabble, I am also unaware where it is to 
be found.” 

“That’s a pity. But the worst of it is that you yourself, in 
the last few days, have received some of these scoundrelly 
traitors in your house.” 

Nazareth Chaush raised gouty fingers to heaven and denied 
it. But he could not manage to sound very persuasive. 

The Kaimakam had an inspiration, not born in the least 
of cunning, merely of his own inertia, which instinctively 
shunned anything troublesome: “I’ll tell you what, Mukhtar. I 
have a request. I’m really getting to loathe all these difficulties 
between us. I’m a peaceful man. I’m not a police-hound. You 
take all this business off my hands. I beg you to go to Marash. 
Speak to the Mutessarif. You’re the city elder, he’s the respon- 

87 



able man. He’s got my report on what’s been happening here 
You two will soon find the right way to deal witWit.” 

“Is this an order you’re giving me, Effendi?” 

“I told you — It’s a personal request. You can refuse, but it 
would hurt me very much.” 

“If I go to Marash, I shall be m danger.’’ 

The Kaimakam grew reassunngly benevolent. “Danger? 
Why? The road’s quite safe. I’ll give you the use of my own 
carriage and two saptiehs for a guard. And I’ll give you a 
letter of personal recommendation to the Mutessarif, which 
you can read before you go. If there’s anything else you want, 
I’ll let you have it.” 

The wrinkled face of this Armenian mountaineer turned 
ashen-grey. He stood there as old and dilapidated as the 
weatherbeaten rocks of Zeitun itself. Desperately he sought 
some valid excuse. But his bps, under the overhanging mous- 
tache, could frame no more words. An unknown power lamed 
his will. He only nodded weakly, at last. Next day he took 
quiet leave of his family. A short journey. He would not be 
away more than a week. His eldest son went with him to the 
Kaimakam’s carriage. His swollen feet and hands made it 
hard to climb into it. The young man supported him. As 
Chaush set one foot on the step, he said in a low, casual voice, 
so as not to be overheard by the coachman- “Oglum, bir, daha 
gelmem.” My son, I shall not come back. 

He was right. The Mutessarif of Marash made short work 
of Nazareth Chaush. In spite of his cordial letter of introduc- 
tion he was received as a criminal, whose crime however was 
kept secret from him, and finally, as an enemy to the state and 
member of a treasonable secret society, he was placed in the 
jail of Osmanieh. Since no further inquiries elicited any in- 
formation as to the secret orgamzation of an Armenian revolu- 
tionary movement, nor even as to deserters in Zeitun, he was 
condemned to the highest degree of the bastinado. After 
which corrosive acid was poured upon his bleedmg feet. This 

88 



was too much for his failing body. He died after an hour of 
indescribable agony. A brass band of janizaries played outside 
the windows of the jail. Their drums and fifes were to drown 
the shrieks from his cell. 

And not even this martyrdom brought the expected results. 
At first nothing happened. Only the grief, the sullen despera- 
tion, of these townsfolk became an almost physical miasma. 
A darkness of the human spint brooded upon this dark moun- 
tain town, stilling people’s breath like a black fog. It was 
March before at last two events gave the government its ex- 
cuse to fulfil Its intentions. The first of these was a shot fired 
out of a window. A pohce patrol in the Yeni Dunya quarter 
of the town, as it passed the house of the dead mukhtar, was 
fired upon, and one of them was slightly wounded. Instead 
of holding the usual inquiry, the Kaimakam declared at once 
that his life was in danger in Zeitun and, having sent tele- 
grams right and left, moved his residence to a barracks outside 
the town. This mode of procedure was entirely consonant with 
his character, slyly stupid, and anxious not to take trouble. 
At the same time, to protect the Mohammedan population, he 
gave orders for a “civil guard” to be armed — ^that is to say, 
a few quickly drummed up hooligans received, quite in the 
manner of Abdul Hamid, a green armlet each and a Mausa 
rifle. Worthy Turkish citizens in Zeitun, digmfied and law- 
abiding souls, were the first to lodge angry complaints against 
their “protectors.” They besieged the Kaimakam and de- 
manded the instant disbanding of their guardians. It availed 
them nothing. A paternal government was obstinately con- 
cerned for their security. At last the civil guard gave a good, 
clear pretext for the second incident, which brought matters 
to a head. In the afternoons, Armenian girls and women hked 
to frequent the Eski Bostan, a small public garden in the 
suburbs. Wide plane trees shaded a few benches. Children 
played about round the fountains, the women sewed and gds- 
siped on the scats. A sherbet-seller pushed his stand. This 

89 



garden was suddenly invaded by the raggedest members of the 
civil guard. These panting vagabonds flung themselves on the 
Armenian women, held them, and began to strip off their 
clothes. For, no matter how intense the itch to slaughter the 
men of the accursed race, the Turks had always longed for 
their women, those soft-limbed, f ull-hpped creatures with alien 
eyes. Shrieks and children’s howls filled the air. But help came 
the next instant. A much stronger force of Armenian men, 
who, scenting evil, had crept out after the town’s protectors, 
thrashed them until they were lame, with bare fists, straps 
and cudgels, and took away their rifles and bayonets. 

To their own disaster. Open rebellion against the stated This 
disarming of the civil guard by rebels furnished all the proof 
that was wanted. It could not be denied. That same evening 
the Kaimakam issued a list of names for arrest to be handed 
over by the muniapality. The men affected came together in 
desperate rage, swore not to separate, and took refuge, half an 
hour east of the town, in an old tekkeh, an abandoned cloister 
of pilgrims and dervishes. Some deserters on Ala Kaya and 
other points in the nearby mountains got wind of this and 
came down to join the fugitives. This little fortress contained 
about a hundred men. 

The Mutessarif in Marash, the government agents in Istan- 
bul, had all they had planned for. The time for petty provoca- 
tions was over and a very efiecuve litdc rebellion well under 
way. Neutral and allied consuls should no longer be allowed 
to keep their eyes shut to Armenian lawlessness. Within two 
days military reinforcements had reached Zeitun — ^two pro- 
visional infantry companies of the line. The bashi, the major 
in command, laid siege at once. But — ^whether because he was 
a hero or merely a fool — ^when he rode forth, disdainful of any 
cover, on a plunging horse at the head of his men, towards the 
tekkeh, to subdue its garrison in this very frank and warlike 
manner, he and six of his men were shot down with well- 
aimed bullets. This was even more than had been desired! 

90 



The major’s heroic death was broadcast at once, with a blare 
of trumpets, to all four corners of the empire. Ittihad worked 
feverishly to get the exact note required into the cries of in- 
dignation that arose. In about three days Zeitun had become 
an armed camp. A contingent of four battalions with two 
batteries had been summoned to clear out this httle nest of 
despairing fugitives. All this, moreover, at a moment when 
Jemal Pasha needed every man and every gun for his fourth 
army. In spite of this vast surrounding force a private was 
sent with a white flag to admonish the rebels to surrender. He 
received the classic answer: “Since we have to die, let it be 
fighting.” 

But the surprising, the miraculous, thing was that they lived. 
For scarcely had the siege artillery dropped its fourth super- 
fluous shell against half-ruined walls when the order came 
from some mysterious quarter to cease fire. Were the few 
Moslems among the besieged a suflicient reason for such mis- 
placed humanity? The townsfolk of Zeitun did not suppose 
it— they saw in this constrictmg truce the omen of some more 
than usually gruesome evil. They had reason to do so. And m 
thar terror they sent a deputation to the Kaimakam, begging 
him that the valiant troops might free them of these cursed 
rebels as soon as possible. They had nothing to do with them. 
The Kaimakam moaned and sighed. It was too late now to 
see reason. All future decisions were in the hands of the com- 
mander of the occupying regiments. He himself was now no 
more than a tolerated cipher. 

One radiant morning in March a terrifying rumour spread 
through the town. The besieged deserters, leaving their dead, 
whom they had however disfigured past recognition, had 
escaped from the fortress and disappeared into the mountains. 
Those Zatunlis who did not bcheve in miracles asked: How 
could a hundred tattered, highly suspicious-looking men have 
got through hnes of over four thousand trained soldiers? Ahd 
the questioners knew well what their question meant. The 

91 



blow had already fallen by midday. The commandant and the 
Kaimakam called the whole town of Zeitun to account for 
the disappearance of this hundred. The profoundly treacherous 
Zeitunlis had, in some dcvihsh fashion, contrived to spirit the 
besieged garrison past sentries, through lines of peacefully 
slumbering Turkish troops. News of this crime had brought 
the Mutessarif in person, in his carriage, all the way from 
Marash. The munadirs, the drummers-up, passed with a dull 
rattle down all the streets. Strings of official messengers fol- 
lowed them, whose business it was to summon the elders and 
notables of Zeitun to “a conference on the situation with the 
Mutessarif and the commanding officer.” The summoned, fifty 
of the town’s most respected inhabitants, doctors, schoolteach- 
ers, priests, large shopkeepers, business men, appeared without 
delay at the place appointed, most of them still in their working 
clothes. Only a fev' of the most far-seeing had hidden any 
money about them. The “conference” consisted in this — ^that 
these elderly and highly respected atizens were brutally herded 
together on a barrack square by sergeants and counted like 
cattle. This had ended the matter, they were informed, and 
the very next day they were to set out along the Marash-Aleppo 
road, on their way to the Mesopotamian desert, to Deir ez Zor, 
to which they were to be “nugrated.” They stared at one an- 
other without a word. Not one of them had a stroke, not one 
of them wept. Half an hour ago they had been the chief citi- 
zens of a town; now, at one blow, they were degraded to al- 
most inanimate lumps of clay, livid of face, half bereft of will. 
The new mukhtar, their spokesman, begged almost voice- 
lessly for one favour: that their families, in the name of divine 
compassion, might at least be left in peace in Zeitun. Then they 
would meet their fate quiedy. The answer came with a crud 
sneer. Certainly not— the Armemans were already sufficiendy 
known, and nobody had any desire to separate the respected 
fathers of families from their nearest relatives. On the con- 
trary, the order was that all present should by tomorrow, an 

92 



liour before sunrise, have handed in a written declaration of 
readiness to march, with all their relatives, -their goods and 
chattels, wives, sons, daughters, children of every age. Orders 
from Istanbul explicitly stated that the whole Armenian pop- 
ulation, to the last baby in arms, was to be evacuated. 2^itun 
had ceased to exist. From now on its name was to be Sultanieh, 
so that no memory might remain of a township which had 
dared open rebellion against the heroic Turkish people. 

Next day, at the hour assigned, the first piteous convoy did 
in fact set out, beginning one of the cruellest tragedies that 
ever in recorded history has overwhelmed a whole people. 
Military guards followed the emigrants — ^it was suddenly evi- 
dent now that this vast force, summoned to reduce a hundred 
fugitives, had other minor, but all the more treacherous, duties 
assigned it. Every mormng now the same heart-rending pag- 
eant was staged. Those fifty chief families of the town were 
followed by fifty others, less well-to-do, and, as the exiles sank 
.in the social scale, their numbers increased. To be sure the vast* 
war zones along every European front were equally crowded 
with refugees. But, hard as was the fate of these homeless 
people, it was nothing compared with that of these poor towns- 
folk. 

For many people it is depressing even to move house. A lost 
fragment of life always remains. To move to another town, 
settle m a foreign country, is for everyone a major decision. 
But, to be suddenly driven forth, within twenty-four hours, 
from one’s home, one’s work, the reward of years of steady 
industry. To become the helpless prey of hate. To be sent de- 
fenceless out on to Asiatic highroads, with several thousand 
miles of dust, stones, and morass before one. To know that 
one will never again find a decently human habitation, never 
again sit down to a proper table. Yet all this is nothing. To be 
more shackled than any convict. To be counted as outside the 
law, a vagabond, whom anyone has the right to kill unpun- 
ished. To be confined within a crawhng herd of sick people^ 

93 



a moving concentration-camp, in which no one is so much 
as allowed to ease his body without permission. — ^Who shall 
dare say he can measure the depths of anguish which invaded 
the minds of these people of Zeitun, in that long week between 
the setting out of the Hrst transport and the last! Even so 
young a man as the pastor Aram Tomasian, who, since he 
was not a native of Zeitun, had better prospects than all the 
others, became almost a wraith in those seven days. 

Pastor Aram — ^he was called only by his Christian name — 
had for over a year been the pastor of the Protestant congrega- 
tion of Zeitun and head of the big orphanage. His appoint- 
ment, at scarcely thirty, to the directorship of that mstitution 
was due to the fact that the American missionaries in Marash 
had considered Aram their most promising pupil and hoped 
great things of him. They had even sent him with a stipend 
for three years to Geneva, to finish his studies there. His 
French, therefore, was fluent, his German and English both 
very good. The orphanage of the American missionaries was 
one of the most pleasing results of their civilizing work of 
fifty years. Its large, bright rooms gave shelter to over a hun- 
dred children. There was a school attached to it, also open to 
children from the town. A small farm surrounded the institute, 
so that the orphanage supplied its own goat’s milk, vegetables, 
and other provisions. Therefore, to be director of this orphan- 
age required not only scholastic ability, but sound, business- 
like common sense. Pastor Aram, attracted like most other 
young men by the thought of being independent, had em- 
braced his new duties with enthusiasm. He had spent a very 
happy and active year and was full of projects. He had mar- 
ried, in the previous spring, shortly before beginning his new 
duties, Hovsannah, an old flame, a girl from Marash, the 
daughter of a pastor of the first generation of the seminary 
there. Whereas most Armenian women are soft-limbed and 
not very tall, Hovsannah was tall and well-developed. She 
moved slowly, never had much to say, and often gave the 

94 



impression of complete detachment from her surroundings. 
Iskuhi, however, had once suggested to her brother that Hov- 
sannah’s quietness had someumes a dash of malice and stub- 
bornness in it. It was said as a joke, and seemed to be an un* 
justified observation, since what really malicious and obstmate 
married woman would ever have had her sister-in-law to live 
with her? The relationship was peculiar in the case of the 
nineteen-year-old Iskuhi. Aram worshipped his young sister. 
In her ninth year, after their mother’s death, he had already 
fetched her away from Yoghonoluk to place her in the mis- 
sionary school in Marash. Later he sent her to Lausanne, 
where she spent a year in a finishing-school. The cost of this 
select ambition on his younger sister’s behalf he had paid by 
many cleverly contrived economics. He could not imagine hfc 
without Iskuhi. Hovsannah knew it and had herself proposed 
this menage a trots. The girl had been given a post as assist- 
ant teacher in the orphanage. She taught French. It was not 
surprising that Iskuhi should have inspired love, and not only 
in her brother. Apart from her magnificent eyes, the most 
beautiful thing about her was her mouth. Her deeply tinged 
lips had always a glistening, smiling sheen upon them, like 
her eyes, as though her mouth could see. The three had con- 
trived a pleasant life together, quite unlike the usual life 
around them. The pastor’s quarters were in the orphanage. 
Their bare look had soon vanished under Hovsannah’s hands, 
for she had a gift for decoration and a sharp instinct for beau- 
tiful things. She made excursions into the town and surround- 
ing villages to bargain with the Zeitun women for fine tapes- 
tries, wood-carvings, household gear, with which to enhven 
these rooms — a pursuit which took up weeks of her time. 
Iskuhi was fonder of books. Aram, Hovsannah, and Iskuhi 
lived for each other. This orphanage and its school were such 
worlds away from the rest of the town that the three flourish- 
ing people had scarcely noticed the oppressive atmosphere of 
Zeitun. The pastor’s Sunday sermons had expressed, until well 

95 



on into March, a heartening cheerfulness, more redolent of the 
peaceful joys of his own existence than of any clear-sighted 
estimate of what the government might intend. 

The blow almost stunned him. He saw his work all gone 
for nothing. But then he was seized with frenzied hope that 
the government would not dare close down the orphanage. 
Aram had soon pulled himself together. A word from Hovsan- 
nah, in the very first days of bamshment, gave him back his 
strength. Only at such a moment as this did the full meaning 
of the Christian priesthood become evident. Thus spoke the 
pastor’s daughter. Heartened by her admonishment. Pastor 
Aram began to put forth superhuman energy. He not only 
kept his church open day and night, to give spiritual comfort 
to groups of exiles as they departed — he went from house to 
house among his flock, from family to family, mingled with 
the sobbing people, helped them with every penny he pos- 
sessed, organized a certain order in the convoys, wrote cries for 
help to all the missions which lay along their route into exile, 
and carefully worded peutions to Turkish officials, wherever 
he considered them well disposed, begging letters and testi- 
monials; attempted to obtain delays, haggled with Turkish 
muleteers — in short did everythmg he could possibly have 
done in these grievous circumstances. Then, when he could do 
no more, could no longer console with the sufferings of the 
gospel, he would sit in silence, beside these people, dazed 
with grief, shut his eyes, close convulsive fingers, and cry aloud 
in his soul to Christ. 

The town emptied from day to day. The roads to Marash 
filled with long serpentine convoys, whose marchers seemed 
unable to aovance. A watcher from the citadel of Zeitun might 
have seen them far into the mountains, and nothing could 
have aroused more horror in him than the creeping quiet of 
these hnes of death, rendered more piteous still by the shouts 
and laughter of the armed escort. Meanwhile the dying streets 
of Zeitun were reanimated by carrion birds, pilferers, profes- 

96 



sional thieves, the dregs of the town, and robbers from the 
country round it. They infested the deserted houses and began 
in them a vigorous search for plunder. Carts and barrows truu' 
died through the streets, sumpter mules came clattering in. 
Carpets, clothes, bedsteads, heaps of linen, furniture, mirrors, 
were all piled up, in leisurely, undisturbed tranquillity, as 
though it were an ordinary, lawful house-moving. The author- 
ities did nothing to prevent it They even seemed to look 
upon such plunder as the natural reward of Turkish scum — 
always providing that the Armemans were made to go peace- 
fully into exile. The order that, of every craft, six representa- 
tives should remain in “Sultameh,” so that the drifting wreck 
of daily life might not be left entirely without its crew, had the 
ring of some barbaric fairy-tale. These lucky ones were not 
chosen by the authorities; the commune was ordered to elect 
them, a cunning intensification of punishment, since it in- 
flicted a new, acute, mental agony. 

The fifth day had already dawned, and Pastor Aram had 
still received no summons. All that had so far happened was 
the visit of a Mohammedan mullah, a stranger, moreover, to 
Zeitun, who had come to demand the keys of the church. This 
Protestant church, as he courteously informed its pastor, was 
to be reconsecrated as a mosque, before evemng prayer. Yet 
Tomasian still clung to the hope that his orphanage would be 
left in peace. He ordered that, from now onwards, everyone 
was to keep indoors, nather teacher nor child to show him- 
self at the windows, and no loud word was to be spoken. The 
shutters were to be kept bolted all day, no lights were to be 
shown in the evening. A strained, death-like rigidity de- 
scended on this house, as a rule so alive. But it is just such 
mockeries of fate which provoke its onslaught. On the next 
day, the sixth, one of those official messengers who sped, hke 
angels of destruction, gruesomcly up and down the streets of 
Zeitun summoned the pastor instantly before the town- 
commandant. 


97 



Aram iiet foith in his priestly gown. His prayer had been 
heard. Not a trace of fear or excitement ruffled his dignity. 
He came, quietly erect, mto the staff-officer’s presence. In the 
present case, unluckily, this bearmg of his was a great mis- 
take, since the bimbashi enjoyed the sight of tearful cringers. 
Then he was sometimes ready to wink, ameliorate, show him- 
self kindly and humane. But Aram’s certainty of manner 
stifled this benevolence at its source, since it was born of the 
ointrast between his greatness and the miserable writhings of 
worms. 

"You are the Protestant pastor, Aram Tomasian, native of 
Yoghonoluk, near Alcxandretta?” The colonel growled this 
warrant of apprehension before he hurled himself on the 
victim. “You leave with the last convoy, tomorrow morning. 
In the direction Marash- Aleppo. You understand?” 

“I’m ready.” 

“I didn’t ask if you were ready. . . . Your wife and other 
relatives to accompany you. You are to take only such bag- 
gage as you can carry. You will receive, as far as it is possible 
to supply it, a daily ration of one hundred direms of bread. 
You are permitted to purchase extra supplies. Any attempt to 
leave your column of march without permission will be pun- 
ished by the officer in charge; with death, in the case of a 
second infringement. The use of vehicles is forbidden.” 

“My wife is expecting a child,” said Aram quietly. 

This seemed to amuse the bimbashi. “You ought to have 
thought of that before.” He glanced again at his papers. “The 
pupils of your orphanage, as Armeman children, are natu- 
rally not exempt from transportauon. They are to hold them- 
selves in readiness punctually, and in full muster — they and 
the whole staff of your institution.” 

Pastor Aram retreated a step. “May I ask if any provision 
is to be made for these hundred innocent children? A great 
many of them arc under ten years of age, and have never 
undertaken a long march. And children need milk.” 

98 



“It is not your place to ask questions, Pastorl" the colonel 
touted. “You’re here to take my orders. For the last week 
you’ve been living in a military area.” 

Had this bellow made the pastor break down in terror, the 
bimbashi, from superlative heights, might perhaps have con- 
ceded him his goats. But Aram continued, quietly stubborn: 
“I shall therefore arrange for our herd of goats to be driven 
out, so that the children may get their milk as usual.” 

“You’ll keep your insolent mouth shut. Pastor, and knuckle 
under.” 

“Moreover, Eifendi, I make you personally responsible for 
the orphanage building, which is the inahenable property of 
American citizens, under the protection of their ambassador.” 

At first the bimbashi could find no answer. This threat 
seemed to have had its effect. Such gods subdue their tinny 
voices as soon as higher gods come into sight. After a long 
and, for a colonel, rather disastrous pause, he spluttered; “Do 
you know that I can tread on you hke an insect? I have only 
to breathe, and you never so much as existed.” 

“I won’t prevent you,” said Pastor Aram, and meant what 
he said, for a monstrous longing for death had overwhelmed 
him. 

Later, when Aram, Hovsannah, and Iskuhi were asked 
which moment of their exile had seemed the worst, they all 
three answered: “The minutes when we were waiting for our 
transport to get under way.” It was an instant in which their 
actual, concrete wretchedness seemed only half as acute as a 
kind of heavy desolation, a primitive horror within their 
blood, some awakened memory of a dim primal age before 
security of domiale had been won as a legal right, so that 
now this mass of a thousand people, dishonoured, helpless, 
fused into one, not only felt the find loss of all its possessions, 
the onslaught of the perils of life, but became aware beneath 
all this of Itself as a collective entity, a people robbed of the 
rewards of centuries of efiort, the cultural fruits of a thoU' 

99 



sand years. Pastor Aram and the two women had fallen a 
prey to this general, unfathomable melancholy. 

An overcast day of low-hung clouds, whicii veiled the fa- 
miliar heads of the moiuitains of Zeitun: far better than a 
sunny day to march on. But this outward gloom of the day 
seemed to load down the backs of the exiles more heavily 
than any of the bundles they had been permitted to take with 
them. This first step had something deeply significant, some- 
thing sacred, in its sheer terror, and which flashed upon every 
soul like lightning. Families herded close together. Not a 
word, not even the crying of a child. But already, after the 
first half-hour, when the last outlying houses were behind 
them, these people felt a certain r^ef. The primitive child- 
ishness of all humans, their poignant, frivolous faculty of for- 
getEulness, gained the upper hand for a certain time. As a sin- 
gle timid chirrup is heard at daybreak, and instantly the whole 
choir has joined it, soon, above the heads of this whole trans- 
port, there arose an entangled skein of jagged children’s voices. 
The mothers quieted them. Even the men called out this or 
that to one another. Here and there a faint laugh was already 
heard. Many old people and children were riding donkeys, 
also laden with bedding, coverlets, sacks. The ofilccr in charge 
allowed it to be. He seemed, on his own responsibility, at his 
own peril, to wish to mitigate the harshness of this order of 
banishment. Aram, too, had procured a donkey for his wife. 
But most of the time they walked beside it, since she feared 
the joltings of the ride. Although it would have been more 
prudent to send them on to the bead, the orphans brought 
up the rear of the convoy. After them came only the herd 
of goats, which the pastor, neglecting orders, had fearlessly 
caused to be driven forth. At first the children enjoyed it aU 
as an adventure, a delightful change. Iskuhi, who kept among 
them, did her very best to encourage these high spirits. No- 
body could have seen the strain of her sleepless nights. Her 
&ce showed only delight in the moment, the joy of life. 

100 



Tender and weak as her body seemed, the all-powerful re- 
silience of her youth had surmounted everything. She even 
tried to get the children to sing. It was a pleasant song from 
Yoghonoluk, where people sang it at their work among vines 
and orchards. Iskuhi had introduced it into the school at 
Zeitun. 


“Days of misfortune pass and are gone, 

Like the days of winter, dicy come and they go; 

The sorrows of men do not last very long. 

Like the buyers in shops, they come and go,” 

But Aram Tomasian came hurrying back at once to forbid 
their singing. The young pastor covered twice or three times 
as much ground as the others. He would be seen at the head 
of the convoy, then at the rear, among the stragglers, always 
with his big gourd hung from a strap, out of which he kept 
offering drinks of raki. And he gave out courage, cracked 
jokes, adjusted differences, doing his best to bring some shape 
and order into life, even such hfe as this. Everyone had a 
duty assigned him. Among the craftsmen, for instance, shoe- 
makers were entrusted with the task, during every halt, of 
quickly repairing all broken shoes. Though there were very 
few Protestants in the convoy, Tomasian was the only priest, 
since all the Gregorians and Catholics had been sent forth in 
the first days. So that the pastor had charge of all these souls. 
He evolved his own particular method cf making these exiles 
keep up their courage. Only what seems aimless is unbearable; 
he knew that by his own expenence. Therefore he kept re- 
peating, in a voice full of the stoutest confidence; “We shall be 
in Marash by tomorrow evening. There, it will all be different. 
Probably we shall stay there some time, till orders come to 
send us home again. And it’s as good as certain we shall go 
home. The Istanbul government can’t possibly be behind all 
this. After all, we have deputies and national representation. 
In three weeks from now it will all be arranged. But what 

101 



matters most is that you should all be well when we get to 
Marash and that we should keep up our strength and cour- 
age” 

Such speeches had a soothing effect, even on the naturally 
pessimistic, on those who were too intelligent to bcheve in 
the innocence of the central government. Despairing faces be- 
gan to brighten. The miracle was due not only to this rosily 
pictured future, but to an aim, a definite, firmly defined 
thought: “We shall be in Marash tomorrow.” In the long rests 
the young officer in command of the Turkish escort showed 
himself a very decent fellow. As soon as his men had finished 
their cooking, he offered the pastor the use of their field- 
cookers, so that warm food could be cooked for the weak and 
aihng. But, since tomorrow they would be in a big town, even 
the strong did not trouble to economize their supplies. And 
for the next few hours the march took on a new ease and 
confidence. 

And when that evemng they encamped in the open fields 
and stretched out, weary to death, on their blankets, they 
could thank God that the first day had passed off tolerably. 
Not far from their camp there was a big village, called Tutlis- 
sek. In the night a few mountaineers, yailadjis, came out of 
the village to visit the Turkish guards. The men squatted to- 
gether in digmfied conference, gravely smoking, and seemed 
to be discussing a serious matter. When, just before dawn, 
the Zeitunlis awoke and went to collect their goats and don- 
keys, to water them, all the beasts had vanished. 

This was the first stroke of a cruel day. They had marched 
two hours when the first death occurred in their ranks. An 
old man suddenly sank to the ground. The convoy halted. 
The young and, as a rule, so friendly officer came riding up 
in anger. “Get on!” A few tried to lift the old man up. But 
they soon had to let him shp to the ground. A saptieh prodded 
him with his foot. “Come on. Get up, you swindler.” But he 
still lay on, with open mouth and turned-up eyes. His corpse 


102 



was flung into the ditch. The ofiicer harried them • “No stand- 
ing about. Forbidden. Get on. Get on.” Not all Aram’s prayers, 
nor the howls of the family, could procure either leave to 
carry the corpse, or a quick burial. It must suffice that they 
raised the old man’s head a httle and placed big stones on 
either side of him. There was no time left even to cross his 
hands on his chest, since the saptichs brandished their cudgels, 
cursing and driving on the hesitant crowd. Panic descended 
on the transport — trotting run, like a stampede, which only 
ceased when the corpse had been left far behind and carrion 
birds from the Taurus came circling nearer it. 

Scarcely had the horror of this first sacrifice been sur- 
mounted when a yayli, a ponderous two-horsed coach, held 
up the convoy. It thrust the exiles off the narrow highroad, 
into swampy fields. Inside it a portly young gentleman of 
about twenty-five, with many rings on his fingers. Carelessly 
he thrust a bejewelled hand through the carriage window to 
present a document to the ofiicer. It was a government order, 
duly stamped, giving him the right to select one or several 
Armenian girls for domestic purposes. Since his coach hap- 
pened to be surrounded by orphans, his jaded, benevolent 
eyes alighted on Iskuhi. He pomted his stick at her, beckoned 
her to him with a smile. This important gentleman did not 
consider himself in the least a violator of women, but their 
benefactor — was he not ready to snatch one of these dirty 
creatures from her fate, take her to his bosom, to that of his 
highly respected family, in his dignified and secure town 
housed All the greater therefore his amazement when the 
fair one, instead of taking happy refuge in his sheltering 
arms, ran av/ay from him with loud shrieks of “Aram.” The 
coach pursued her. Perhaps no reasons with which the pastor 
strove to protect his sister would have availed. That he should 
have menuoned her European upbringing was a mistake, 
born of desperation, since this served only to put an edge on 
the ardour of her would-be protector. Only the sharp inter- 

103 



vendon o£ the young commanding officer setded the matter. 
He most unceremoniously tore up the smtor’s government 
order, adding that, as officer in charge, he alone had power to 
dispose of Armenian convoys. Unless the Effendi mstandy 
made himself scarce, both he and his yayli would be arrested. 
He emphasized all this with a cut of his riding-switch on the 
flanks of the horses. The corpulent benefactor, wounded to the 
quick at having been balked in a good deed, clattered on at 
a remorseless trot. Iskuhi soon recovered from the incident. 
Soon she was seeing it as a joke, so that certain of its comic 
details made her shout with laughter. But her amusement was 
not to last long. 

That same afternoon it began with the sufferings of the 
orphans. It is strange that these children should not singly have 
noticed their wounded feet, but all together — so that a sudden 
howling, whimpering, wailing, which tore the women’s heart- 
strings, filled the air. The easy-going young officer, however, 
was ruthlessly in earnest on one point— no rests or delays 
over and above the regulations. He had orders to reach Marash 
with his convoy two hours after sundown. This he was de- 
termined to carry out punctually, though in all the rest he 
might use discretion, often against the clear indications of his 
superiors. His professional pride was involved in this. There 
could therefore be no question of any halt for the children’s 
bleeding feet to be dressed with oil. 

“All that’s no good to you. See that we get to Marash in 
ome, then you can dress your wounds. Forward.” 

There was nothing for it. Some of the children had to be 
carried. Here even the weak Iskuhi distinguished herself, 
though soon she too was involved in disaster. 

Her brother had repeatedly warned her not to lag in the 
rear of the convoy, or even among the orphans who composed 
it. It was certainly the unsafest part of the transport, immedi- 
ately in front of the ill-dispos^ soldiers of the escort and 
the many varieties of hideous vagabond which straggled in- 

104 



quisiuvcly out of villages. But Iskuhi refused to listen, tot 
she felt her place to be with the children, especially now that, 
with every fifteen minutes, they became more weary, ill, and 
footsore. The other teachers of the orphanage httle by little 
went on ahead, leaving only Iskuhi doing her best to shepherd 
and encourage, with various arts, her yelping infants. They 
stumbled more and more miserably, and for this reason the 
line was often broken, till at last there was a fairly wide gap 
between the rear and the mam body. At such a juncture as this 
Iskuhi felt herself gripped from behind. She screamed and 
tried to wrench herself free. Over her there appeared a 
terrible face, gigantic, with filthy stubble, snorting, roUing its 
eyes, stinking, inhuman. She let out another piercing scream 
and then struggled sdendy with the man, whose spittle 
dripped into her face, whose brown claws were tearing her 
dress to shreds, to fasten themselves into naked breasts. Her 
strength failed. The face above her swelled into a mountamous, 
shifting hell. 

She sank into its horrible breath. ... It was Iskuhi’s good 
fortune that, attracted by the piercing howls of the children, 
the officer came galloping sharply back to them. The brown 
claws flung her to the ground. The tramp tried to run away 
but did not escape a final stroke with the flat of the sword 
on the back of his head. 

Iskuhi struggled to her feet but could not even manage 
to cry. At first she only supposed that her left arm had been 
numbed in the struggle. “As though it has gone to sleep,” 
she thought. Then, suddenly, wild pain flamed up m it. 
Speechless with this, she could not tell her brother what had 
happened. Hovsannah and Aram led her. Not a sound passed 
her lips. Everything in her became unconsaous — only not her 
feet, which still took quick, litde steps. 

It IS still a riddle how they ever managed to reach Marash. 
As soon as the town was in sight, the desperate pastor went 
to the officer and even ventured to ask him how long he 

105 



thought the exiles would be allowed to halt there. That, he 
was plainly told, would depend on the Mutessarif. He might 
safely reckon on a halt of several days, since most of the 
out-going transports were still in the town. There would be 
some regrouping. Aram raised imploring hands. “You see 
what a state my wife and sister are in. I beg you to let us go 
to the American mission, for this evening.” 

The young officer was a long time thinking it over. In the 
end his pity for poor Iskuhi overcame all official considerations. 
Still on horseback, he scribbled a leave-chit for Pastor Aram 
and the two women. 

“I haven’t the right to let you go. If you’re caught escaping, 
I shall be held responsible. You are ordered to report to me 
daily, in the concentration-camp.” 

The mission fathers received their three prot^M and pupils 
with compassionate love. They had devoted their whole lives 
to Armenian Christians— and now this thunderbolt, which 
might be the merest indication of the devastating storms to 
cornel A doctor was sent for at once, unluckily a very young, 
inexperienced one. He jerked Iskuhi’s arm backwards and 
forwards. The infernal pam of this, added to all that had 
gone before it, made her really faint for a few minutes. No 
bones were broken, said the doctor, as far as he could see, 
though the arm looked curiously disjointed. The hurt was in 
the shoulder. He put on a big, tight bandage and gave her a 
draught to dull the pain. It would certainly be as well, he 
advised, if she could keep her arm stiffly resting for at least 
three weeks. Iskuhi did not sleep a wink that night. Hovsan- 
nah, in the room assigned to the women, had dropped at once 
into a sleep which was like unconsciousness. 

Aram Tomasian sat at the missionaries’ table, discussing 
what was to be done. The vote was unanimous. The rector, 
the Reverend E. C. Woodley, said decisively: “Whatever else 
may happen, you can’t go back into that convoy. Hovsannah 
and Isktihi would be dead long before you reached Aleppa 

io6 



And, apart from that, you aren’t natives of Zeitun, but were 
sent there by us.” 

Pastor Aram had one of the hardest spiritual conflicts of 
his whole life to sustain. “How can I leave my people, at 
the very time when they need me most?” 

How many Protestants were there in the convoy? they 
asked. He had to admit that, apart from a tiny minority, they 
all belonged to the Old Armenian or the United churches. 
But that did not console him m the least. “In such circum- 
stances I can’t worry about trifles. I’m the only priest they 
have.” 

Mr. Woodley calmed him: “We’ll send someone else with 
them. But you’re to go to your home. You must wait there 
till we have another cure for you.” 

“And what’s to happen to my orphans?” groaned Aram 
Tomasian. 

“You can’t help the children by dying with them. The 
orphanage in Zeitun is our property. You’ve done more than 
your duty by bringing the orphans to Marash. Leave all the 
rest to us. It’s ceased to be your affair.” 

A teasing voice in Aram was not to be silenced. “Am I not 
bound to more than just my duty?” 

Old Woodley showed impatience, though his heart was 
rejoicing over Aram. “You surely don’t imagine, Aram 
Tomasian, that we intend to submit to this treatment of our 
orphanage so tamely i* It’s not decided yet, by any means, what 
is to happen to these children. But you’re getting in our way, 
my dear boy. As the pastor of Zeitun you’re compromised. 
Understand? Good. I release you formally from your charge 
as director of the orphanage.” 

Aram felt that, if only he could hold out a few mmutes 
longer, Woodley would not only cease to oppose, but would 
bless him for his Christian courage in sacriflce. But he said 
no more, in spite of this distinct sensation, and submitted to 
the mission father’s arguments. He believed he was doing this 

107 



for Hovsannah and Iskuhi. And yet, every time he woke out 
of a sleep crowded with images, he was fUled with the heavy 
sensation of defeat, of having betrayed his vocation to the 
priesthood, with the shame of weaklings. 

Next morning the Reverend E. C. Woodley, accompanied 
by the American vice<onsul, went to the Mutessarif and pro- 
cured for Tomasian and his wife and for Iskuhi an official per- 
mit to travel to Yoghonoluk. But this would be valid for only 
fourteen days, within which they must have reached their 
destination. So that, in spite of the serious state of Iskuhi’s 
arm, they were forced to set out three days later. They might 
have chosen the shorter route, via Bagche, the nearest railway 
station along the Anatolian line. They were advised most 
strongly against it. The Taurus line was crowded with trans- 
ports for Jemal Pasha’s fourth army. Nowadays prudence for- 
bade any unnecessary contact with Turkish troops, especially 
with Armenian women to escort. Since the pastor had already 
submitted to the Marash fathers’ decision, he was equally 
ready to let them choose his route. Instead of the short railway 
journey they began a very difficult carnage drive, of several 
days’ duration, on mountain roads. First into the mountains, 
to Aintab, then along the wretched winding tracks over the 
passes of Taurus, down to Aleppo. The mission fathers placed 
a large two-horse carriage at Aram’s disposal, and an extra 
horse, which could also be used as a mount. They wired to 
their representative in Amtab to prepare relays. 

But the travellers were not yet past the suburbs of Marash 
when pursuing, imploring howls drowned the clatter of 
hoofs. The orphan girl Sato and the house-boy Kevork came 
running up behind them, clamouring. Fortunately it was early 
morning, there was still no one out in the streets to betray this 
scene. Inconvenient as it was to have to do so, nothing re- 
mained for Pastor Aram but to rescue these two unwanted 
additions to his party. The litde vagabond Sato had always 
been a very difficult child and a burden on the Zeitun orphan- 

108 



age. About every three months she would be overcome with 
longings for vagabond hfe. Then she would vanish for days, 
to come back in an almost subhuman state, lousy and caked 
with dust and very subdued. And before these attacks she 
was quite unmanageable— mcapable of connected speech or 
any other laboriously acquired attainment. Nor was it any use 
to lock her up. She seemed to get through walls like a ghost. 
But, if she could not manage to get away, Sato would be 
possessed by devils and could alarm the whole house with her 
genius for mahcious damage. Iskuhi had been the first to 
influence her to the point at which her mahee could be 
restrained and perhaps at last even exorcized — and this not 
by any specifically educational means. Iskuhi knew very little 
of pedagogic methods. For this little tramp was devoured with 
love for young Iskuhi, love which wrought sad confusion in 
Sato’s already bewildered brain, and even seemed to have the 
power to engender that most dangerous of emotions — self- 
contempt. Now, in her pleated orphanage smock, Sato came 
pattering down the street with many cries. 

“Kuchuk HanumI Miss! Please don’t leave Sato alone,” 
this skmny little waif besought, with eyes widened by deathly 
fear and yet at the same time insolent — eyes which concealed 
inescapable resolution withm their depths. Neither Iskuhi 
nor Hovsannah had ever really been able to repress a shudder 
of instinctive repugnance at the sight of Sato. Even when 
she was clean and kempt, she inspired a certain physical dis- 
gust. 

Yet now this unwelcome acquisition had to be stowed 
away on the back scat. The house-boy Kevork took his place 
on the box beside the driver. Kevork came from Adana. Ever 
since, as a half-grown lad, he had been hit over the head with 
a rifle-butt, in the course of one of the numerous “incidents” 
there, he had remained a good-natured cretin. He could only 
talk in a stutter. And when, like Sato with her uncontrollable 
loAgings to run wild, he was seized with his mama for dano 

109 



ing, he too was impossible to control. This solemn fit had 
caused him to be named “the dancer.” It was a quiet and very 
harmless peculiarity, which seldom possessed him altogether, 
and then only when something had stirred his mind. Other- 
wise Kcvork faithfully discharged his duties as stoker, water- 
carrier, wood-chopper, gardener, and with mute zeal did the 
work of two grown men. How many promising children and 
useful adults (the thought flashed into Aram’s mind) were 
there to rescue — and yet God sends me a little criminal girl 
and an idiot. It seemed to him a significant answer to his 
lukewarm shrinking away from sacrifice on behalf of the 
banished folk of Zeitun. Sato, however, was shaken by eerie, 
boisterous merriment. She wriggled up, with her pointed 
knees, against Iskuhi; she laughed and jabbered all day long, 
as though exile were the best conceivable holiday. Perhaps it 
was her first ride in a carnage. She let her thin litde hand, 
with Its hig, filthy nails, hang out, as though over the side of 
a boat, drawing it after her with delight through the cool 
wake of surrounding air. These high spirits only annoyed and 
alarmed the others. Iskuhi jerked away hei knees. The pastor, 
nding beside the carriage, threatened Sato that, unless she 
could sit still, he would either put her down without com- 
punction or tie her hands. 

The exhausting journey to Aintab — their nights had to be 
spent in wretched village khans — passed without catastrophe. 
In Aintab itself they rested three days. The Armenian colony 
there had received Mr. Woodley’s wire and the relay horses 
were waiting. On the previous day the first convoy from 
Zeitun had reached the town. The people of Aintab had seen 
these miserable people and now awaited their own fate in 
despair. They scarcely went out of doors. Horrible rumours 
kept circulating. It was said that the government intended 
to give even shorter shrift to Aintab — that the Armenian quar- 
ter was simply to be set on fire, its inhabitants shot in batches. 
Yet the Aintab commune could not be kind enough to the 

no 



pastor. It was as though the sight of these rescued victims 
inspired in them the hope of themselves being saved. Aram 
Tomasian tried to find a home in the town for Sato. But she 
clung in such strident terror to Iskuhi that he ended by taking 
her back into the carriage, perhaps as an act of penance for 
his own sin. 

Things still went smoothly as far as Aleppo, though they 
spent four days crawling down the passes of the Taurus, had 
the greatest difficulty in finding relays at the post-houses, and 
had twice to sleep in empty barns. But the big town, with 
its many bazaars, its well-paved streets, its government and 
army buildings, pleasant gardens, and opulent mission-houses, 
inns, and hostels, acted like a charm on these ailing and dis- 
pirited people. In spite of sharp inquisition by saptiehs at the 
octroi — Sato and Kevork, after several minutes’ palpitating 
fear, were passed as “servants”— the very sight of these streets, 
with their streams of undisturbed-looking people, gave bonds- 
men the illusion that they were free. Their recepuon, however, 
by the missionaries and heads of the commune was very 
different from those at Aintab and Marash. The fathers here 
were so overburdened with business and worries of all kinds, 
they were so bureaucratically organized, that Aram shrank 
from demanding their help. All he asked was two small rooms 
for himself and his famdy. The Armenian colony here was 
very rich, and so more timid, more hard-hearted, than the 
smaller people in Aintab. Their terror was intensified by the 
fact that they had so much more to lose than the others. 
Worse still, when the pastor mentioned Zeitun, he perceived 
at once that the very name of this town of revolt aroused 
mixed feelings in these city-brethren. They did not wish to 
seem, in official eyes, to have any connexion with such folk, 
pilloried now as stubborn rebels. The pastor’s very presence 
in theu: offices was enough to compromise them. At present, if 
one hoped to save one’s skin, it was necessary to seem a fanat- 
ical devotee of the state and scrupulously shun all suspected 

III 



company. Aram was offered a sum of money. They could do 
no more for him. He refused it with thanks. 

Time pressed, and Tomasian found himself obliged to hire 
a yayli for himself — a two-horse cab, of which there were 
dozens on every rank. At first the owner refused even to think 
of facing all the discomfort of such a journey. As far as the 
coast behind Antioch ^ He clutched his fez, astounded at such 
foolery. However, after many protestations, many “Tnshal- 
lahs” and “Allah bihrs,” a price was settled, two-thirds of 
which he insisted on being paid in advance. Since Aram 
knew that every other cabman would have acted in exactly 
the same way, he gave him the money. The pastor chose the 
road to Alexandretta in spite of its windings. He hoped in 
a day and a half of quick driving to reach the place where it 
forks to Antioch, and from there to be at home within 
twenty-four hours. But, just before sunset on the first day, 
the driver climbed down off his box, inspected damaged hoofs, 
wheels, axles, and declared that he had had quite enough. 
His horses were fagged, his carnage overloaded, it wasn’t his 
business to cart Armenians all over the world — and so he was 
going straight back home, to be sure of getting to Turont, 
where he had relatives, in reasonable time. No prayers availed 
on him, not even the offer of almost double his fare. He had 
had his money in advance, it was all he wanted, the Turk 
magnanimously announced. He would do even more; he 
would take them back all the way to Turont for nothing, 
where they could spend a delectable night in the excellent 
beds of the first-class khan of his relations. Tomasian raised 
his stick and would have given the insolent brute a thrashing 
had not Hovsannah held his arm. Upon which the man threw 
thar luggage out of his yayli, jerked his reins, and left these 
five people stranded in the midst of a wilderness. For an hour 
they walked on along the road in the hope of coming to a 
village or getting a lift. But, far and wide, there was nothing, 
no cart, not even a barn, no huts, no village. They had to 

II2 



spend another night in the open, and it passed more slowly 
than the first, smce no one had reckoned on it. The curve 
o£ the road shone under the famt moon like a dangerous 
scimitar. They lay down as far from it as they could, on the 
bare earth. Yet even that mother of all proved ill disposed 
towards Armenians. Damp forced its way up through the 
rugs; poisonous airs from the swamp, alive with insects, en- 
veloped them. Kcvork and Aram kept guard, the pastor 
tightly grasping the hunting-nflc which the Marash fathers 
had given him for the journey. 

But the depths of thtir mrery were touched only in the next 
fifty hours, during which these wanderers reached Yogho- 
noluk. It was a miracle that no harm came to Hovsannah, 
that Iskuhi did not entirely collapse. The pastor made the 
mistake of not sticking to the highroad, off which he struck 
far too early on to a cart-track, m the south-westerly direction. 
After a few miles along it, the cart-track trailed off into noth- 
ing. They were lost and wandered for hours. In the last stage 
of their way of agony Kcvork displayed great physical strength 
and earned the women by turns on his back for long dis- 
tances. (They had soon had to leave their luggage.) The 
pastor plodded on with only one thought — not to lose direc- 
tion, given him by the clouds above the mountain along the 
coast. Again and again they discovered cart-tracks, which they 
could follow for a couple of miles and which spanned the 
waterfalls in little budges of rotting planks. Here and there 
a kangni, an ox-cart, would also give them a lift for some 
long distance. They were not molested by human beings. 
The few peasant Moslems they came across were friendly, 
gave them water and cheese. They would not have defended 
themselves had they been attacked. Numb to the pain of their 
aching limbs, their bleeding feet, they stumbled on m a coma 
of exhaustion. Even the sturdy Aram walked half in a dream, 
lost in a world of juggling images. Sometimes he burst out 
laughing. Sato showed remarkable indifference to pain. She 

“3 



limped on agonized feet, swollen black and blue, behind 
Iskuhi, as though all her vagabond escapades had been meant 
to harden her to such toil. 

When Gabriel saw the five, on the church steps, they were 
still possessed by exhausted dreams. Yet, since they were 
young, since the sudden sense of having been rescued rose 
within them, since faces of paiple whom they knew, the 
pastor, the priest, the doctor, hovered before them, since 
tremulous words were in their ears, and all the warmth of a 
home<oming enveloped them, they came quickly to them- 
selves, and this leaden, superhuman strain melted without 
transitions into a state of excited animation. 

Pastor Aram Tomasian kept insisting: “Don’t think of the 
old massacres. This is far worse, far more gruesome, far more 
relentless, than any massacre. And, above all, it’s far slower. 
It remains with you, day and night.” He pressed his hands 
against his temples. “I can’t get the horror out of my mind. 
. . . I keep seeing those children. ... If only Woodley can 
save them . . .” 

Dr. Altouni was m silent attendance on Iskuhi. But the 
other men kept questioning Aram. A confused outburst of 
only too natural inquiries: “Will it stop at Zeitun'* . . . Isn’t 
the colony in Aintab already on the road? . . . What do 
they say in Aleppo^ . . . Any news from the other vilayets? 

. . . And we . . ?” 

The doctor had unrolled the bandage and was bathing the 
darkly suJffused arm in warm water. He laughed sharply. 
“Where can they deport us to? We’re already deported on 
Musa Dagh.” 

The noise of the crowd in the square had become audible 
in the room. Ter Haigasun cut short these confused inquiries. 
He turned his timid, yet at the same time very resolute, eyes 
on Bagradian. “Will you be so kind as to go out and say a 
few words to the people? Make them go home.” 

114 



What had made Ter Haigasun light on Gabriel, the Parisian, 
who had nothing in common with these villagers? It should 
by rights have been the duty of Kebussyan, the mukhtar, to 
speak to the crowd. Or had the priest his own secret reasons 
for his request? Bagradian started and felt embarrassed. 
None the less he did as Ter Haigasun told him, though he 
took Stephan out with him by the hand. Armenian was his 
native language, yet in this first instant, as he found himself 
facing this crowd — which meanwhile had increased to about 
five hundred — ^it felt like impertinence to use it, an unwar- 
ranted interference with their affairs. He would almost rather 
have spoken Turkish, the army language. But only his first 
words made him feel embarrassed, and then came a clear 
rush of syllables, the ancient speech within him began to 
germinate, to spin itself out. He asked the inhabitants of 
Yoghonoluk, and whoever else had assembled here from the 
other villages, to go home quietly. So far the only irregularities 
had occurred in Zcitun, and nowhere else, and their true 
cause would be investigated. Every Armcman knew that 
Zcitun had always been exceptional. For the people round 
Musa Dagh, who belonged to an entirely different district, 
and had never been mixed up in politics, there was not the 
very slightest danger. But in just such times as these law and 
order were more than ever necessary. He, Bagradian, would 
sec to it that from now on every important event was regu- 
larly reported in the villages. And, if necessary, all the com- 
munes should meet in an assembly of the people to discuss the 
future. 

Gabriel, to his own surprise, found that he was speaking 
well. The right words came of themselves. A pacifying 
strength went out of him to his hearers. Somebody even 
shouted: “Long live the Bagradian family.” Only one woman’s 
voice wailed: “Asdvaz im, my God, what’s going to happen 
to us?” 

If the crowd did not disperse immediately, it at least broke 

“5 



up into smaller groups and no longer besieg^ the church. 
Of the saptiehs only Ali Nassif snll prowled; both his com- 
rades had already made themselves scarce. Gabriel went across 
to the pock-marked Ah, who for some time had seemed to 
find It hard to make up his mind whether to treat the effmdi 
as a great gentleman or a khanzir kiafir, an unbelieving swine, 
who, in view of the latest turn of events, was officially not 
even worth answering. This very indecision caused Bagradian 
to take a high-handed line: “You know what I am? I’m your 
master and official superior. I’m an officer in the army.” 

Ali Nassif decided to stand to attention. Gabriel felt sig- 
nificantly in his pocket. “An ofScer gives no baksheesh. But 
you will receive from me these two medjidjeh in payment of 
the unofficial service which I am about to explain to you.” 

The rigid All was becoming more and more acquiescent. 
Bagradian jerked his hand to let him know he might stand 
at ease. “Lately I’ve been seeing some new faces among you 
saptiehs. Has your post been increased?” 

“There were not enough of us, Effendi, for the long roads 
and the heavy service. So they sent us some extras.” 

“Is that the real reason? Well, you needn’t answer unless 
you like. But how do you get your orders, your pay, and so 
on?” 

“One of the boys rides to Antakiya every week and brings 
back the orders.” 

“Well, All Nassif, listen to your unofficial service. If ever 
you get any orders, or hear any news of your command, which 
seems to be important to this district — ^you understand ? — ^you’re 
to come to me at once, at my house. There you’ll receive three 
times what I’m giving you now.” 

'Then, with the same negligent haughtiness, Bagradian 
turned away from the saptieh and went back to the sacristy. 

Dr. Altouni had finished examimng the arm; he was say- 
ing scornfully: “And to think that m Marash they’ve a big 
hospital, instruments, an operating-theatre, medical libraries— 

ii6 



and yet that ass of a doctor didn't so much as dress it properly. 
What can I do? I’ve got nothing here but a rusty forceps for 
pulling out teeth. We shall have to put the arm between two 
slats. It seems in an awful state. She must have a good long 
rest in bed, in a pleasant room. And the same, of course, for 
your wife, Aram.” 

The old builder, Tomasian, was in despair. “I’ve so htde 
room since I sold my house. How shall we ever manage?” 

Gabriel at once offered Mademoiselle Tomasian a room in 
the villa— one with a pleasant view out on to the mountain. 
Dr. Altouni’s instructions should be carefully followed. 

The old doctor was overjoyed: “Koh yem — splendid, my 
friend. And this poor litde creature — Sato, isn’t it? — ^will you 
take her, too, so that my honoured patients may be together? 
My old bones will thank you.” 

It was arranged. Aram and Hovsannah went with 
Tomasian’s father, taking with them Kevork the dancer, 
whom the old man suggested that he could use in his work- 
shop. Gabriel sent Stephan ahead to bring Juliette news of all 
these events. 

The boy came breathless into the house. 

“Maman' Maman! Something’s happened. We shall be 
having people in to stay with us. Mademoiselle Iskuhi, the 
sister of the pastor at Zeitun. And a htde girl, with her feet 
all bleeding.” 

This surprising news affected Juliette strangely. Gabriel had 
never before brought strangers to stay in the house without 
havmg asked her permission. His relationship to her had in 
it a kmd of hesitation where guests were concerned, especially 
Armenians. But when, within the next ten minutes, he arrived 
with Iskuhi, the Altounis, and Sato, juhette was kindness 
itself. She, like so many pretty women, fell an easy prey to 
feminine charm, especially the charm of a young girl. The 
sight of poor Iskuhi moved her and aroused in her all the 
instinct to help of an elder sister. As she gave all the neces- 

117 



saiy orders, she kept saying to herself with satisfaction: Shes 
fcsdly u£iusua.L One seldom sees such delic3.teAooking faces 
among them. She looks hke a lady, even in those ragged 
clothes. And she seemed to speak such good French, for an 
Armenian.” The room was soon ready. Juliette herself came 
to wait on Iskuhi; she even brought her a very pretty lace 
nightdress of her own. Nor did she hesitate to sacrifice her 
own expensive scents and eaux de toilette, although these 
treasures were irreplaceable. 

Altouni again inspected Iskuhi’s arm, with many bitter litde 
jokes on the subject of the doctors in Marash. “Is it very 
painful, my dear.?” No, she felt no pain in it now, only a 
kind of feeling, a numb feeling — she tried to think of the 
word— a feeling of not being able to feel it. The old doctor 
could see that all his skill would be of very little use to her. 
Still — ^hc could do nothing else — he smothered her arm in a 
wide bandage, which sheathed her shoulders, up to the neck. 
The nimble dexterity soil preserved in his old brown, wrinkled 
fingers became apparent as he did it. Soon after this Iskuhi 
was comfortable in bed, clean, cared for, and at peace. Juliette, 
who had helped with all this, was about to leave her. “If you 
need anything more, dear, all you have to do is to swing this 
big hand-bell hard. We’ll send you up something to eat. But 
I shall be coming in to sec you first.” 

Iskuhi turned the eyes of her people upon this bene- 
factress — eyes which still looked out into terrifying distances, 
and did not seem to notice this pleasant safety. 

“Oh, thank you, Madame — shan’t need anything. . . . 
Thank you, Madame.” Then came the thing which had never 
happened in all that fearful week in Zcitun, nor in the days 
with the convoy, nor on the journey. Iskuhi burst into storms 
of tears. The outburst was not convulsive, it was sheer weep- 
ing, without a sob in it, a grief, so to speak, vwthout hill or 
valley, a release from rigidity, vast and inconsolable as the 
Asiatic steppes from which it came. As Iskuhi wept on quietly, 

ii8 



she kept repeating: “Forgive me, Madame. ... I never meant 
to do this. . . .” 

Juliette would have liked to kneel beside her, kiss her, and 
tell her she was an angel. Yet something made these conven- 
tional words of comfort quite impossible. Some remoteness 
still enveloped this young girl, her experience wrapped her 
like a chrysalis. Juliette could not follow her own warm im- 
pulse. She contented herself with hghtly stroking Iskuhi’s 
hair and waiting in silence by her side till this quiet grief had 
fully spent itself, till the eyehds drooped, and the girl sank 
down into merciful nothingness. 

Meanwhile Mairik Antaram had dressed and bandaged 
Sato’s feet. The child was put to bed in one of the unused 
servant’s bedrooms. Scarcely had she dropped into heavy 
sleep, when she let out her first blood-curdling scream. Her 
screams continued. In all these days she had never once shown 
signs of fear, but now, as she dreamed life over again, a 
hundred whips seemed to swish around her. It was no use 
shaking her repeatedly. She slept too heavily to be waked, so 
that after a time her moans and piercing howls began again. 
Sometimes these long-drawn wailmgs sounded as though the 
voice were chnging desperately to one saving name: Kuchuk 
Hanum. 

As these hair-raising howls forced themselves out of the dis- 
tant bedroom, Juliette met her son coming up the wide steps 
to the front door. Stephan was glowing with excitement. This 
new thmg, this unknown, with its threat, electrified him and 
set his nerves pleasantly tingling. In November he had cele- 
brated his thirteenth birthday and so was just reaching the 
age when sensations kindle most boys’ enthusiasm. He would 
even stand at the wmdow watching some unusually heavy 
thunderstorm, filled with the unholy longing that something 
out of the ordinary might happen. Now he stood and listened, 
agreeably horror-stricken. 

“Maman, listen to Sato screaming.’’ 

119 



“Iskuhi’s eyes— my boy has the same kmd of eyes as Iskuhi.” 
Juliette perceived it in a flash. And the subterranean snares and 
entanglements of life revealed themselves. She felt her first 
great terror for Stephan. She hurried him into her room and 
kissed him hard. Sato’s screams still rang in the empty hallway. 

Later that evening Gabriel Bagradian had invited the priest 
Ter Haigasun, Bedros Altuuni, the doctor, and Apothecary 
Krikor to come to see him. They sat together, in the dimly 
lighted selamhk, over chibuks and cigarettes. Gabriel wanted 
to know how these highly educated and very worthy notables 
of Yoghonoluk really viewed the position, how they intended 
to act in the event of an order of banishment, and what means 
the commune of Musa Dagh had at its disposal to avert the 
worst. 

He could get nothing out of them. Ter Haigasun stubbornly 
kept his mouth shut. 1 he doctor announced that, since he was 
already sixty-eight, the three or four short years he had stJl 
to live would be got through somehow. If anything happened 
to bring the end a little sooner, then so much the better as far 
as he was concerned. Ridiculous to trouble one’s head for the 
sake of a few scurvy months. Was the whole of life really 
worth a single worry? The main thing was to save people 
anxiety as mucii, and for as long as, one possibly could. That 
he considered his chief duty, which he meant to fulfil, what- 
ever happened. All the rest was no business of his. Krikor 
smoked his nargileh, profoundly at peace — he had very 
prudently brought it with him. He selected, with an air of 
profundity, from among the glowing coals those which ap- 
pealed to him most and pressed them down with his naked 
fingers on a roll of tobacco in the hubble-bubble. Perhaps he 
wanted to symbolize to the others that he could grasp fire 
without being burned by it. Thought alone gives any right to 
rcahty — not vice versa. Why want to do anything? All action 
IS already in vain, and only thought thinks on for ever. He 


120 



dted a Turkish proverb, which might equally vrell have issued 
from the lips of the Agha Rifaat Bereket: “Kismetden zyade 
olmass.” Nothing happens unless predestined. 

These words afforded the opportunity of evading the 
troublesome problems of the horn*. And Krikor’s hollow voice 
became eloquent on the various theories of predestination, the 
relationship of Christendom to Islam, the Council of Chalced- 
ony. The very words inebriated. The priest should be made 
to hear with amazement how much theology Apothecary 
Krikor had acquired. 

It was too much. Gabriel rudely sprang to his feet All the 
European in him was up in arms against these sleepers, these 
gossips, who would unk down into death without a protest, as 
they rotted their lives away in filth. He interrupted Krikor, 
with a contemptuous wave of his hand: “I want most urgently 
to submit an idea of mine to you gentlemen. It came to me 
today as I talked to the saptieh. All Nassif. I’m still, after all, 
a Turkish officer, a front-hne soldier, decorated in the last 
Balkan war. Now suppose I get into uniform and go to 
Aleppo? How would that be? Years ago I happened to make 
myself useful to General Jemal Pasha ” 

The old doctor almost gleefully interrupted: “Jemal Pasha 
moved his headquarters some tunc ago to Jerusalem.” 

But Bagradian was not to be put off. “It makes no difference. 
Djelal Bey, the Wall, is even more important than Jemal 
Pasha. I don’t know him personally, but we all know about 
him, who he is, and that he’ll do whatever he can for us. 
Well, now, suppose I go to him and remind him that Musa 
Dagh IS right out of the world, and that therefore we can’t 
possibly have had anything to do with politics, perhaps . . .” 

Gabriel said no more and listened to the imperturbable 
silence. Only the bubbling water in Krikor’s nargileh broke 
it at irregular intervals. It was some tune before Ter Haigasun 
laid down his chibuk. 

“The Wall, Djelal Bey” — he thought it over, staring out in 


lai 



front of him— "is certainly a great friend of our nation. He 
has shown us repeated kindness. And under his government 
we neva* needed to fear the worst. . . . Unfortunately his 
friendship for us has done him very httle good. . . .” Out 
of his wide sleeves Ter Haigasun drew a folded newspaper. 
“Today is Friday. This is Tuesday’s Tanin. It’s a paragraph 
m very small print, pushed away into the corner of the paper.” 
He held up the sheet, far from his eyes. 

“‘According to information received from the Ministry of 
the Interior, His Excellency the Wall of Aleppo, Djelal Bey, 
has I'cen permanently placed on the retired list.’ . . . That’s 
all it says.” 


X23 



Interlude of the Gods 


5 


At the very instant when, urging his cabman to greater speed, 
Dr. Johannes Lcpsius reached the great bridge across from 
Pera, the garden suburb, to Stamboul, the automatic signal 
started to ring, the barrier sank, the bridge trembled like a 
hve thing, broke groaning in two, and its rusty halves, this 
ade and that, rose slowly up, to allow a warship to proceed 
into the innermost harbour of the Golden Horn. “This is 
really dreadful,” Dr. Lepsius said, aloud and in German, 
closing his eyes and sinking back on to the frayed upholstery 
of his araba, as though he had given up the struggle. Yet he 
was out of the cab m the next instant, had thrust a few 
uncounted piastres on the driver, had run (nearly slipping 
up on a fruit skin) down the steps and on to the quay, where 
a few kayiks, little ferryboats, plied for hire. There was not 
much choice; only two phlegmatic old ferrymen drowsed in 
their boats, not seeming in the least to want a fare. Lepsius 
jumped into a ferryboat and waved across, in sheer, scurrying 
desperation, to the Stamboul side. He had still six minutes till 
his appointment at the Seraskeriat, the War Ministry. Even if 
his boatman rowed with a will, he would need a whole ten 
to cross the sound. On the other quay — so reckoned the im- 
patient Dr. Lepsius — ^there could not fail to be a cab-rank. 
So that from there it need only take another five minutes to 
the Ministry. Six from fifteen minutes, if all went smoothly-— 
nine minutes late. Very unfortunate, but still not so bad a^ 
all that. . . . And, of course, everything went wrong. Th(. 

123 



boatman, pushing like a gondolier, was not to be roused by 
admonitions, nor by imploring prayers, from his calm medita- 
tion. The boat danced up and down but would not go for- 
ward. “It’s the tide, Effendi. The sea’s coming in.” Thus did 
die weatherbeaten Turk define fate, against which there can 
be no striving. To make bad worse, a fishing cutter crossed 
their bows — which meant the loss of two more minutes. 
Dully resigned, impotent as only a man can feel who finds 
himself tossed on waves, the German sank into reflections. 
He had, for the sake of this one appointment, undertaken all 
the fatigue of this journey, come to Constantinople from 
Potsdam, besieged the German ambassador day after day, and 
not him alone, but every neutral representative. This one 
appointment had sent him hurrying to meet every German or 
American in from the interior, in every possible quarter of 
the town, to get further details. This one appointment had 
kept him sitting for whole days in the American Bible So- 
ciety’s offices, had caused him to make himself a nuisance to 
the people of the various orders, had sent him, by carefully 
thought-out routes, avoiding spies, to meet Armenians in 
secret rooms. All so as to be prepared for the great encounter. 
And now fate played this practical joke of making him late 
for It. It was almost enough to inspire belief in some direct, 
Satanic intervention. How hard that very pleasant German 
naval commander attached to the military mission had worked 
to get this conversation arranged' Three times it had been 
conceded, three times postponed. Enver Pasha is the Ottoman 
war god. He does not care to be ceremonious with such an 
insignificant antagonist as Dr. Johannes Lepsius. 

So — the ten minutes had shpped away. Enver would by 
now have given orders not to admit this querulous German 
on any pretext. The game was lost. Let it be lost! “My own 
country is fighting for dear life. The dark rider with the 
scales flies above us also. What do Armenians really matter 
to mei^” Johannes Lepsius discarded these spurious consola- 

124 



dons with a short, dry little gasp. Not These Armenians 
meant a great deal to li^— even more i£ he dared rigorously 
to examine his heart — ^more perhaps than even his own 
countrymen, mad and smful as that no doubt might be. Ever 
since Abdul Hamid’s butcheries, since the massacres of ’96, 
since that mission to the interior, his first days of missionary 
experience, he had felt himself especially sent to these un- 
fortunates. They were his task on earth. And at once he could 
see a few of their faces. Such faces as only those beings have 
who must empty the chalice to its dregs. Christ on the cross 
may well have had just such eyes. It was perhaps for them 
that Lepsius loved these people so dearly. An hour ago, in the 
eyes of the Patriarch, the Armcman chief priest of Turkey, 
Monsignor Saven, he had seen, or rather had had to keep 
turning his face away from, an ardent hopelessness. And this 
visit to the Patriarch had made him late. It had of course been 
stupid to go back to Pera after calling on him, to the Hotel 
Tokatlyan, to change. Yes, but — he had had to call on the 
Patriarch in the long black cassock suitable to a Protestant 
clergyman. And, with Enver, he did not want to stress his 
position, was most anxious, in that fateful interview, to avoid 
any appearance of formality. He knew these Ittihad people his 
opponents. A casual tone, a grey lounge suit, certainty of man- 
ner, the hint of powers behind — ^that was the proper way to 
deal with adventurers. And now, the grey lounge suit had 
caused all this. 

He ought not to have stopped so long with the Patriarch, 
could have got away in a few minutes. Unluckily Dr. Lepsius’s 
forte had never been systematic concentration. Even his success 
in helping Armemans at the time of the Abdul Hamid mas- 
sacres had been less a matter of thought-out policy than of 
passionate insistence on being received. He was still far too 
much at the mercy of that youthful vice, of thinking graphi- 
cally — ^“dances of death,” “the eternal Jew,” “John Bull,” etc. 
Improvisation, a tendency to rely on the minute — these, as he 

125 



knew, were his worst faults. So that today he had not been 
able to free himself from the aspect of that piteous cleric 
“You’ll be with Enver in an hour.” The faintness of Mon- 
signor Saven’s voice told its own story of sleepless nights; 
it seemed to be dying, along with his people “You’ll stand 
before that man. God bless you! But not even you will be 
able to do anything.” 

“I’m not so pessimistic, Monsignor,” Lepsius had striven to 
reassure. 

But his words had been stopped by a gesture of agonized 
submission. “We’ve just heard today that, after Zeitun, Aintab, 
Marash, the same threat of deportation is to be suspended 
over the East Anatolian vilayets. So that up to now, apart 
from the west of Asia Minor, only Aleppo and the strip of 
coast from Alexandretta have been spared. You know better 
than anyone that deportation is a more painful, more long- 
drawn-out kind of death by torture. They say that not one 
inhabitant of Zeitun has survived.” And the Patriarch’s eyes 
had forbidden Lepsius any protest. “Leave the impossible and 
concentrate on the possible. You may succeed — I don’t sup- 
pose you will — ^m getting a respite for Aleppo and the country 
along the coast. Stress German public opinion, the newspapers 
you intend to inform. Above all, don’t morahze. It merely 
provokes him to contempt. Stick to political facts. Threaten 
him economically — ^that’s your most likely way to make an 
impression on him. And now, my dear son, you have my 
blessing for your noble work, Christ be with you.” Lepsius 
had bent his head, but the Patriarch had signed his chest, 
with a wide cross. 

So that here he sat in this heavy boat, ploughing its way 
through the waters of the Golden Horn, under its stolid, medi- 
tative oarsman. And when at last they arrived, it was more 
than twenty mmutes late. With one glance Dr. Lepsius was 
aware that no arabas waited along the quayside. He broke into 
a wry little laugh — smee more than hazard must conceal itself 

126 



somewhere within this chain o£ hindrances. Some oppoang 
power had taken a hand in the Armeman business, which no 
doubt must be left to go on unopposed, and was thrusting a 
stave in between his legs. He made no further attempt to find 
a cab, but began to run, stout, elderly, conspicuous-looking as 
he was. 

He did not get far. The squares and alleys of old Istanbul 
were thick with holiday-keeping crowds. Along past shops 
and cafes, gay with bunting, under beflagged windows, thou- 
sands in fez and tarbush jostled and shoved. What was it? 
The Allies driven out of the Dardanelles? Lepsius thought 
of the distant gun-fire which he heard so often in the night. 
The big guns of the British fleet, hammering on the gates of 
Constantinople. But he remembered that this was the anni- 
versary of some triumph of the Young Turkish revolution — 
perhaps of that glorious day on which the Committee had 
killed off all its political opponents, to seize power at last. 
Not that it mattered what they were celebrating; any crowd 
shouts and brawls. A sohd mass of people in front of a shop. 
Boys, hoisted on ready shoulders, clambering up along the 
shop-front. Next minute a big sign-board came clattering 
down. Lepsius, wedged in the crowd, asked his neighbour, 
who wore no fez, what all this was about. “No more foreign 
signs,” he was told. “Turkey for the Turks. All sign-boards, 
names of streets, and advertisements to be written exclusively 
in Turkish from this day on.” And this neighbour (a Greek 
or Levantine) giggled spitefully. “This time they’ve demol- 
ished an ally. It’s a German business-house.” 

A long line of halted trams crawled on. “Really it doesn’t 
matter,” Lepsius thought, “when I get there now. It’s all 
over.” None the less he put on a spurt, thrusting into the 
crowd, shoving relentlessly. One more side-alley, and the 
square opened out before him. The vast palace of the Seras- 
keriat. High rose the tower of Mahmut the Second. And now 
the pastor took his time. He walked slowly, so as not to come 



breathless into the lion’s den. When, fagged out with endless 
stairs and corridors, he whipped out his card at the offices of 
the Ministry of War, it was only to be informed by a smartly 
uniformed and very amiable aide-de-camp that His Excellency 
Enver Pasha deeply regretted that he had found it impossible 
to wait and begged the Herr Doktor to do him the honour of 
calling at the Ministry of the Interior within the Seraglio. 

So Dr. Johannes Lepsius had to set out on an even longer 
journey. But now the malign spell was broken. The demons 
had thought out another method. They almost forced him 
to be at his ease. Outside a cab had just set down its fare. 
The driver had his eye on an easy journey, he avoided crowds, 
and so, in a magically short time, fully reposed, and invaded 
now by a self-confidence for which he could have given him- 
self no reason, the crusader entered the quiet world of the 
Seraglio and clattered thunderously on across the ancient 
cobbles to the Ministry. Here they were expecting him. Even 
before he could show his card, an official had greeted him 
ivith the question: “Dr. Lepsius?” What a good omen I More 
stairs, and a long corridor. But, borne on the wings of happy 
presentiment, the pastor almost felt he hovered along it. The 
quiet Ministry of the Interior, Talaat Bey’s fortress, made a 
pleasantly dream-like impression. These official rooms seemed 
almost enchanted — without doors, only divided by billowy 
curtains. This, he could not tell why, soothed him with the 
assurance of coming success. He was conducted to the end of 
a passage, into a special suite. Enver Pasha’s headquarters in 
the Ministry. Here, doubtless, m these two rooms the dice of 
the Armeman fate had been cast. A large apartment, seem- 
ingly a waiting- and audience-room. Next it, a study, contain- 
ing only a big, empty writing-table. The curtain into this 
study had been pulled back. Lepsius saw three portraits on the 
wall behind the empty table; right, Napoleon; left, Frederick 
the Great; an enlarg^ photograph of a Turkish general in 
the middle. Doubtless Enver Pasha, the new war god. 

128 



The expectant pastor seated himself beside the window. His 
i^es, over the rims of pince-nez, drew in peace from the beauty 
of heaps of ruins, shattered cupolas, broken columns, sheltered 
by lunbrella-pines. Beyond, the Bosporus, whose toy steamers 
thrust their way on. The pastor’s blue, myopic gaze, his full 
and childish lips pouting through the short grey beard, his 
severe cheeks still rosy with haste and perturbation— all this 
produced an image of long-su£Fering, of a soft heart, inflexibly 
hard upon itself. A servant brought m a copper coffee poL 
Lepsius greedily gulped three tiny cups. This coffee gave him 
an advantage, his nerves tightened, his veins pounded fresh 
blood to his brain. When Enver Pasha came upon him, he 
had just emptied his fourth cup. 

Before leaving Berlin, Johannes Lepsius had asked for minute 
accounts of Enver Pasha, yet he felt surprised that this Turkish 
Mars, this one of the seven or nine arbiters of the life or death 
of the world, should be so unimposmgly diminutive. He in- 
standy saw the reason for those portraits of Frederick the 
Great and Napoleon. Heroes five feet tall, litde conquerors, 
always on tip-toe, who force a way to power to spite their 
inches. Lepsius would have wagered anything that Enver 
Pasha wore high heels. He did not, in any case, take off his 
lambskin kepi, which certainly looked much taller than dress 
regulations allowed. The gold-tabbed marshal’s (or fancy- 
dress) uniform, beauafully moulded to the waist, lent added 
majesty, by the smart, stiff perfection of its line, investing 
this figure, in conjunction with gleaming rows of medals, with 
something almost frivolously young, ornately bold. “The 
gipsy-king,” reflected Lepsius and, although his heart was 
pounding, he could not escape a rampant waltz of his early 
youth: 

“All this and more 
You may be sure 
I-U do.” 


129 



Yet this text, which now assailed him at the aght of the 
spick'and'span magnificence of the uniform, was in sheer con' 
tradiction to the glance and manner of this youthful com' 
mander-in-chief. Enver Pasha looked shy, almost embarrassed; 
from time to time he would open his eyes like a young girl. 
The narrow hips and sloping shoulders gave his movements 
a certain delicate grace. Lepsius felt heavy and obese. 

Enver’s first attack took the form of arousing a sudden sym- 
pathy with his tripping person, a feeling he knew how to 
awaken in visitors. He did not, having welcomed Lepsius, con- 
duct him to the adjoining study but, begging him to stay 
where he was, pulled up a chair for himself from the table 
to the window, not troubling that his face was in the light 
while his visitor’s was shaded. 

Johannes began the interview (he had thought this out, in 
deciding his plan of campaign) with greetings from an admir- 
ing German lady, which he laid at the general’s feet. The gen- 
erd smiled his peculiar, shy htde smile and said in a pleasant 
tenor, which, vocally even, gave full effect to the winsomeness 
of his whole personality, and in excellent German: “I have 
the very deepest respect for Germany. There can be no doubt 
that you are one of the most astonishing peoples in the world. 
Personally, I’m always dehghted to get a chance to receive a 
German.” 

Enver, Pastor Lepsius knew, had been pro-French on the 
Committee and perhaps, in private, continued to be so. He had 
stubbornly tried not to come mto the war on Germany’s side, 
but on that of the Allies. All that did not matter at present. 
Lepsius went on feeling his way, with civilities: “Your Ex- 
cellency has so many devoted German admirers. We all ex- 
pect you to astonish the world with your virtories.” 

Enver opened his eyes. A little movement of the hand 
seemed wearily to defend him against the demands which 
always lie hidden within such flatteries. A silence, implying 

130 



more or less: “Well now, my dear fellow, look out whom 
you’re dealing with.” Lepsius turned his head to the window, 
listening, though out there no noise was audible save the faint 
hoots and signal-bells on the Bosporus. 

“I’ve been noticing how enthusiastic the people seems to be, 
here in Istanbul. Especially today. I was most impressed by 
the crowds.” 

The general, in his pleasant, but by now quite indifferent 
voic^ decided on a pithy litde saying, in the style of patriotic 
pronimciamentos: “The war is hard. But our people is aware 
of what it owes itself.” 

The German made his first sortie: “Is it quite the same in 
the interior. Excellency?” 

Enver glanced with delight into the farthest corner of the 
room: “Certainly. Great things are happening in the interior.” 

“Excellency, these great things are well known to me.” 

The war-lord refused, with a hint of surprise, to understand. 
For the leader of a great empire, his cheeks looked surprisingly 
fresh and young. “The position on the Caucasian &ont im- 
proves every day. It is of course a little premature to speak of 
the southern army under Jemal and your countryman Kress.” 

“Most encouraging. Excellency. But, by the interior I mean 
the peaceful vilayets, not the war zone.” 

“While a state is at war, all its government districts arc war 
zones, more or less.” 

This was discharged with a certain delicate crispness. So 
that the outpost skirmish had gone against Dr. Lepsius, who 
was forced to open frontal attack: ‘Tour Excellency is aware, 
perhaps, that I’m not here as a private individual, but as reprc' 
sentative of the German Orient Society, who will require my 
report upon certain happenings.” 

A surprised Enver sat wide-eyed. What exactly is an Orient 
Society? 

“Our Foreign Office, indeed our Chancellor, is in active 



sympathy with my mission. On my return I am to deliver a 
lecture m the Reichstag on the Armenian question, for the in* 
formation of the German press.” 

Enver Pasha, hstenmg in routine patience, his eyes cast 
down, looked up at the words “Armenian question.” The 
sulkiness of a spoilt child whom heavy grown-ups will not 
stop pestering with thar stale old nonsense clouded his face 
fejr an instant. It passed at once. Yet Dr. Lepsius’s heart al- 
ready failed him. “I come to you in my need. Excellency, be- 
cause I’m convinced that a leader of your distinction will not 
do anything which might besmirch his name in history.” 

“I know, Herr Lepsius,” Enver Pasha began, in the softest, 
most indulgent voice, “I know that you’ve come here, and 
asked for this interview, to demand my explanation of all these 
matters. And although a number of urgent questions require 
my attention. I’m perfectly willing to spare you whatever time 
you may need and give any information you choose to ask 
for." 

Lepsius was forced to acknowledge this sacrifice with a 
deeply grateful little bow. 

"Ever since my friends and I have controlled the govern- 
ment,” the general continued, “we’ve always striven to grant 
the Armenian millet’s requests, and see that absolute justice 
was meted out to it. There was an old understanding. Your 
Armenian friends acclaimed our revolution most cordially; 
they swore all kinds of oaths of fidelity to us. Unfortunately 
they broke them overnight. We shut our eyes as long as pos- 
sible, as long as the Turkish people, the ruling people, was not 
in danger. We are living in Turkey, are we not? But when, 
after war was declared, cases of high treason, felony, and sub- 
versive tendencies kept increasing, when desertion assumed 
alarming proportions, when it came to open revolt — ^I’m only 
thinking, mind, of the great revolt in Zcitun — then we found 
oursdves obliged either to take action to repress it or lose our 
right to direct the war and remain the leaders of our people.” 

132 



Lepsius nodded, as though he were well on the way to be* 
Ootning convinced. “In what, Excellency, did these legally 
proved cases of treason and sedition consist?” 

A broad gesture from Enver. This plenitude of crimes could 
never fully be exhausted. “Conspiracy with Russia. Sasonov’s 
speech praising Armemans m the Petersburg Duma was clear 
enough. Conspiracies with France and England. Intrigue^ 
espionage — all you can think of.” 

“And these cases have been legally investigated?” 

“By court martial, naturally. It would be just the same in 
your country. Not long ago fifteen of the worst offenders were 
sentenced and publicly executed.” 

“Clumsy insolence,” Lepsius mentally decided. He leaned 
back and tried to control his unsteady voice. “According to 
my knowledge those fifteen Armenians were arrested long 
bdEore the war. So they can scarcely have been found gmlty of 
treachery by usual military law.” 

“We ourselves derive from the revolunon.” Though the 
general did not answer to the point, he did so with the glee- 
fulness of a schoolboy who remembers a most amusing esca- 
pade. “We know exactly how all that’s done.” 

Lepsius sw'allowed down a very expressive description of 
the revolution and all its works. He cleared his throat for the 
next inquiry: "And these Armenian notables and intellectuals, 
whom you’ve arrested here in Istanbul and deported — ^are they 
also convicted of treachery?” 

“You must see for yourself that we can’t keep even possible 
traitors so near the Dardanelles.” 

Johannes Lepsius did not contradict, but plunged, in a burst 
of sudden temperament, mto the main issue: “And Zeitun? 
I’m very anxious indeed to hear Your Excellency’s view of 
Zeitun.” 

Enver Pasha’s blankly gleaming suavity was overcast with 
a sudden disapproval. “The revolt in Zeitun is one of the worst 
mutinies m the history of the Turkish empire. Unfortunately 

133 



our troops lost heavily in their struggle to subdue the rdxls, 
though I’m afraid I can’t give you exact figures.” 

“My reports of Zeitun differ from those of Your Excel- 
lency.” Lepsius planted this blow in hesitant syllables. “My 
accounts make no mention of any revolt of the population 
there, but of provocative oppression, lasting over a period of 
months, by the district and sanjak officials. They speak of 
some trifling disorder, which could easily have been checked 
by strengthemng the town police, whereas any fair-minded 
person can easily perceive a deliberate intention in military 
reinforcements of over a thousand strong.” 

“You’ve been given false information.” Enver was still 
quiedy well behaved. “May I inquire who your informants 
were, Herr Lepsius?” 

“I can name a few of them, but I may as well say that no 
Armenian sources are included. On the other hand I have the 
specific memoranda of various German consuls, reports from 
missionaries, the eye-witnesses of the worst atrocities. And 
finally I’ve been given a most consistent account of the whole 
business by the American ambassador, Mr. Morgenthau.” 

“Mr. Morgenthau,” said Enver brightly, “is a Jew. And Jews 
are always fanatically on the side of minorities.” 

Lepsius gasped at the graceful evasiveness of this. His feet 
and hands were cold as ice. “It isn’t a question of Morgenthau, 
Excellency, but of the facts. And you neither will, nor can, 
deny them. A hundred thousand people are already on their 
way into exile. The officials talk of nothing but resettlement. 
But I suggest to you that, frankly, that’s a misnomer. How 
can a people of peasant mountaineers, craftsmen, townsfolk, 
professional people, be resettled by a stroke of the pen in Meso- 
potamian deserts — empty plains? In waste country, hundreds 
of miles av^y from their homes, which even bedouin tribes 
refuse to inhabit? And that object is simply a blind. The dis- 
trict officials are conducting these deportations in such a way 
sha^ in ' first eight days’ march, these virctchcd people either 

134 



collapse or go mad of hunger, thirst, disease, so that helpless 
boys and defenceless men get slaughtered by Kurds and 
bandits, if not by the mihtary — ^and young girls and women 
are literally forc^ into prostitution. . . 

The attentive general listened scrupulously, though his lan- 
guid pose most clearly indicated: This is the kind of rigmarole 
one has to hear at least twelve times a day. “All very regret- 
table. But the supreme commander of a great military power 
is responsible for the security of his war areas.” 

“War areas?” Lepsius cried out — and at once controlled 
himself, trying to manage Enver’s calm. “ ‘War areas’ is the 
one fresh nuance. All the rest— Zcitun, high treason, intrigues 
— ^was there already. Abdul Hamid made masterly use of all 
that, if the Armenians cared to believe it all over again. I’m 
an older man than you are. Excellency, and I saw it all on the 
spot. But when I think of these deportations, I almost want 
to apologize to that old sinner. He was a bungler, a harmless 
chili compared to this new method. And yet, Excellency, your 
party only took power because it wanted to replace the blood- 
shed of the old Sultan’s time by justice, unity, and progress. 
The very name of your Committee proclaims it.” 

This stroke was daring, indeed rash. For an instant Johannes 
Lepsius sat expecting the war-lord to stand up and* conclude 
the interview. Yet Enver sat quietly on, not the lightest shadow 
clouding his suave serenity. He even bent forward, confi- 
dentially. “Dr. Lepsius, may I show you the other side? . . . 
Germany, luckily, has few, or no, internal enemies. But let’s 
suppose that, m other arcumstances, she foimd herself with 
traitors in her midst — ^Alsace-Lorrainers, shall we say, or Poles, 
or Social-Democrats, or Jews — ^and in far greater numbers than 
at present. Would you, Herr Lepsius, not endorse any and 
every means of freeing your country, which is fighting for its 
life against a whole world of enemies without, from those 
within? . . . Would you consider it so cruel if, for the sake 
of victory, all dangerous elements in the population were 

*35 



simply to be herded together and sent packing into distant, un* 
inhabited territory?” 

Johannes Lepsius had to hold on tight by both hands to 
keep himself from springing to his feet and giving full rem 
to his indignation. 

“If my government,” he said very distinctly, “behaved un- 
justly, unlawfully, inhumanly” (“in an un-Christian way” was 
the expression on the tip of his tongue) “to our fellow-country- 
men of a different race, a different persuasion, J should clear 
out of Germany at once and go to America.” 

A long, wide-eyed stare from Enver Pasha. “Sad for Ger- 
many if many other people think as you do there. A sign that 
your people lacks the strength to enforce its national will re- 
lendessly.” 

At this point in the interview the pastor was overcome by a 
great fatigue. It was born of the sensation that, in his way, this 
little, closed-up fellow was in the right. The hoary wisdom of 
the world is always, in its way, right against Christ’s wisdom. 
But the worst of it was that Enver’s rightness infected, at this 
instant, Johannes Lepsius, and lamed his will. The uncertain 
destiny of his fatherland descended on his soul with the 
weight of a mountain. He whispered; “It’s not the same 
thing.” 

“Quite right. It’s not the same thing. But it’s we who gam 
by the comparison. We Turks have a hundred umes harder 
struggle to assert our rights than you Germans.” 

Lepsius, tortured and absent-minded, pulled out a hand- 
kerchief, which he held up like a parliamentary banner. “It 
isn’t a question of protecting yourselves against an enemy in 
your midst, but of the planned extirpation of another race.” 

This he jerked out in a sullen voice; his eyes, no longer able 
to endure Enver’s cool detachment, strayed towards the study 
with its three heroes on the wall. Had Monsignore Saven, the 
Patriarch, no right there? Lepsius suddenly remembered that 
he was here to discuss economics. Quickly he gathered strength 

136 



for a fresh encounter: “Excellency. I won’t presume to waste 
your time in empty discussion. But may I venture to draw 
your attention to certain rather grave drawbacks, which you 
yourself perhaps may not yet have considered very carefully 
— ^naturally enough, weighed down as you arc by your burden 
as commander-m-chief. I may perhaps know the interior, Ana- 
tolia, Cilicia, Syria, better than you do, since I worked for 
years under difficult conditions in all that territory. . . 

And so, in hurried words — ^he felt time ebbing away — ^hc 
developed his plea. The Turkish empire, without the Arme- 
nian millet, would be bound to go to pieces economically, and 
its army would, as a consequence, be endangered. Why? He 
did not care to insist on the export trade, ninety percent of 
which was in Christian hands, and His Excellency knew as 
well as he did that most of the foreign trade was conducted by 
Armenian firms, so that in consequence one of the most es- 
sential branches of war industry, the provision of raw ma- 
terials, as well as of manufactured goods, could only be suc- 
cessfully managed by these firms — ^for instance, by such a 
world-established business as Avetis Bagradian and Sons, 
which had branches and representatives in twelve different 
European cities. And as to the interior itself, he, Lepsius, years 
ago, on his journeys there, had seen that Armenian agricultural 
methods in Anatolia were a hundred times ahead of Tuikish 
small landholding. In those days Cilician Armenians had im- 
ported hundreds of threshing-machines and steam-ploughs 
from Europe and, by so doing, given the Turks a strong in- 
centive to massacre, since they not only slaughtered the ten 
thousand inhabitants of Adana but also broke up the machines 
and ploughs. In that alone, and nowhere else, lay the real mis- 
chief. The Armenian millet, the most progressive and active 
section of the Ottoman population, had for years been making 
vast efforts to lead Turkey out of its old-fashioned, primitive 
methods of agriculture into a new world of up-to-date farm- 
ing and budding industriahzation. And it was for just this 

137 



very beneficent pioneering work that Armenians were being 
persecuted and slaughtered by the vengeful violence of irritated 
sloth. 

“Let’s admit, Excellency, that craftsmanship, trade, and peas- 
ant industry, which in the interior arc almost exclusively Ar- 
menian, could be taken over by Turks — ^who is to replace all 
the numerous Armenian doctors, trained in the best universi- 
ties in Europe, who care for their Osmanh patients with the 
same skill as for their own people? Who’s to replace all the 
engineers, all the solicitors, all the export traders, whose work 
so indefatigably drives the country forwards? Your Excellency 
will perhaps tdl me that, at a pinch, a people can live without 
intellect. But it can’t hve without a stomach. And at present 
the stomach of Turkey is being slit open, yet you hope to sur- 
vive the operation.” 

Enver Pasha heard this out, his head inclined gently on one 
side. His whole aspect, incisive, youthful, subdued only by 
that hint of shyness in him, displayed as few unintcntiond 
creases as did his uniform. The pastor, on the other hand, was 
already beginning to look disheveUed. He was sweatmg, his 
tic was askew, his sleeves worked their way up his arms. The 
general crossed his short but slim legs. The glittering riding- 
boots fitted as though they were on trees. 

“You speak of the stomach, Herr Lepsius.” He smiled 
effusively. “Well, perhaps after the war Turkey may have 
rather a weak one ” 

“She won’t have any stomach left at all. Excellency.” 

Unruffled, the commander continued; “The Turkish popu- 
lation IS forty milhons. Well, now — try to sec it from our pomt 
of view, Herr Lepsius. Is it not a great and worthy policy to 
try to weld these forty millions together and establish a nat- 
ural empire, which henceforth will play the same part m Asia 
as Germany does in Europe? This empire is waiting. We have 
only to grasp it. I agree that among Armenians one finds an 
alarming proportion of intelhgence. Are you really so much 

138 



in favour of that kind of intelligence, Herr Lepsius? I’m not 
We Turks may not be very intelligent in that way, but on the 
other hand we’re a great and heroic people, called to estabhsh 
and govern a world empire. Therefore we intend to surmount 
all obstacles.” 

Lepsius twisted his fingers but said not a word. This spoilt 
child was the absolute master of a great power. His finely 
modelled, attractive little head brooded on such statistics as 
might have amazed all who knew the reality. He could pro- 
duce none to blind Dr. Lepsius, who was precisely aware that 
in Anatolia there were scarcely six milhon pure-bred Turks; 
that, if one went into Northern Persia, to the Caucasus, to 
Kashgar and Turkestan, he would not be able, even by in- 
cluding all nomad Turkic tribes, the vagrant horse-thieves and 
steppe-dwellers spread across a land as wide as the half of 
Europe, to trump up as many as twenty millions. Such dreams, 
he reflected, the narcotic of nationalism engenders. Yet at the 
same time he was moved to pity for this porcelain war god, 
this childlike Antichrist. 

Johannes Lepsius’s voice became soft and surcharged with 
wisdom: “You want to found a new empire, Excellency. But 
the corpse of the Armenian people will be beneath its founda- 
tions. Can that bring you prospenty? Could no more peaceful 
way be chosen, even now ?” 

Here for the first time Enver Pasha laid bare his deepest 
truth. His smile had no longer any reserve in it, a cold stare 
had come into his eyes, his bps retreated from a strong and 
dangerous set of teeth. 

“There can be no peace,” he said, “between human beings 
and plague germs.” 

Lepsius came down on this in a trice: “So you openly admit 
your intention of using the war to extirpate the Armeman 
millet?” 

The War Minister had decidedly said too much. He retired 
at once vinthin his impregnable fortress of discourteous cour- 

139 



tesy. “My personal opinions and intentions are all conuined 
in the memoranda published by our government on the sub- 
ject, We are acting under the force majeure of the war, in self- 
defence, after having waited and observed as long as we could. 
Citizens who work to destroy the state render themselves 
liable in all countries to be dealt with by the sharp process of 
law. So that our government is withm its legal rights.” 

They were back at the beginning. Johannes Lepsius could 
not manage to sa£e a sound like a groan. He could hear Mon- 
signore Saven’s voice: “Don’t moralizcl Be matter-of-factl 
ArgumentsI” Oh, if he could but remaih matter-of-fact and 
use only arguments keen as razor-blades! But this very neces- 
sity to keep sitting, the impropriety of springing to his feet 
to answer, set his nerves despairingly on edge. He, the born 
speaker on committees, at pubhc meetings, needed room, free- 
dom to move in. 

“Excellency” — he pressed a hand against his wide and finely 
shaped forehead— “I’m not going to speak to you in platitudes. 
I won’t say that a whole people can’t be made to suffer for the 
misdemeanours of a few individuals. I won’t ask why women 
and children, small children, as you yourself were once, must 
suffer a bestial death for the sake of a policy of which they 
haven’t so much as heard. I want you to look at the future, 
your people’s future. Excellency! Even this war will end some 
day, and Turkey will be faced with the necessity of conclud- 
ing peace terms. May that day be a good one for all of usi 
But, if It should be unlucky, what then. Excellency? Surely 
the responsible head of a people must take some measures 
against the possibility of an unfavourable ending of the war. 
And in what position will the Ottoman peace commission be 
to negotiate if it finds itsdf faced with the question: ‘Where 
is your brother Abel?’ A highly painful situation. The victori- 
ous Powers — may God prevent it! — might use this pretext of 
a great crime that has b«n committed to share out the booty 
remorselessly among themselves. And General Enver Pasha, 

140 



the man who, in such a case as that, would be the greatest 
among his people, the man who had shouldered all responsi- 
bility, whose word had been all-powerful — how would he de- 
fend himself then agamst that people?” 

Enver Pasha’s eyes had begun to dream; he said quite seri- 
ously: “Thank you for this very excellent hint. But any man 
who goes into poliucs must possess two special qualifications: 
first, a certain levity, or, if you hke, indifference to death — ^it 
comes to the same thing; and, secondly, the unshakable belief 
in his own decisions, once they are taken.” 

Herr Pastor Lepsius stood up. He crossed his arms upon his 
breast, almost in the fashion of the East. This guardian angel, 
sent by God to shield the Armenian people, was in a pitiful 
state. The big handkerchief hung out of his pocket, his trousers 
had worked up almost to his knees, his tie wandered nearer 
and nearer his ear — even his pince-nez seemed to have van- 
ished utterly. 

“I implore Your Excellency” — he bowed before his seated 
interlocutor — “let it end today. You have made such an ex- 
ample of this enemy in your midst — who is not one— as his- 
tory has never recorded. Hundreds and thousands are dying 
on the highroads of the East. Make an end today. Give orders 
to keep back these new edicts of transportation. I know that 
not all the vilayets and sanjaks have been depopulated yet. If, 
for the sake of the German ambassador and Mr. Morgenthau, 
you still hesitate with the great deportations in Western Asia 
Minor, spare Northern Syria, Aleppo, Alexandretta, Antioch, 
for my sake. Say: ‘This is enough.’ And when I get back to 
Germany, I’ll sing your praises wherever I go.” 

And still the pastor would not sit down again, although the 
general’s patient hand had several times pointed to his chair. 

“Herr Lepsius,” Enver declared at last, “you overestimate 
my competency. The carrying into effect of such government 
decrees is a matter for the Mimstry of the Interior.” 

The German snatched his pmce-nez from off red eyes. “But 

141 



that’s just it— the way in isdiich the thing’s being carried out 
It isn’t the Minister, or the Wali, or the Mutessari^ who puts 
these decrees into execution, but bestial, heartless subordinates 
and sergeants. Do you, for instance, or does the Minister, in- 
tend that women and chiidien should collapse on the high- 
road and be driven on at once with cudgels? Is it your inten- 
tion that a whole area should be infected with rotting corpses, 
that the Euphrates should be thick with dead? I know for a 
fact that that's how it’s being carried out.” 

“I’m aware how well you know the mterior.” Enver Pasha 
came a httlc way to meet him. “And I should be very glad to 
have your written suggestions as to how these matters can be 
improved. I’ll examine them carefully.” 

But Lepsius stretched out his arms. “Send me down there. 
That’s my first suggesuon. Not even the old Sultan refused 
me that. Give me full powers to orgamze these transports and 
convoys. God will lend me the strength, and I’ve had more 
experience than anyone. I don’t need a piastre from the Otto- 
man government, I’ll get hold of the necessary funds. I shall 
have German and American rehef commissions behind me. 
Once before I succeeded in a great work of assistance. I helped 
to establish numbers of orphanages and hospitals and more 
than fifty industrial societies. In spite of this war I can do the 
same agam, and better — and in two years you yourself will be 
thanking me, Excellency.” 

This time Enver Pasha had listened with not merely his 
usual attention, but intense eagerness. And now Herr Lepsius 
saw and heard a thing he had never experienced in his life. 
It was no sneering cruelty, no cynicism, that transfigured the 
boyish look on this war-lord’s face. No. What Herr Lepsius 
perceived was that arctic mask of the human being who “has 
overcome all sentimentality” — the mask of a human mind 
which has got beyond guilt and all its qualms, the strange, 
almost innocent naivete of utter godlessness. And what force it 
had, that a man could not hate itl 

^2 



‘Tour estimable suggestions interest me,” said Enver ap- 
preciatively, “but it goes without saying that I must reject 
them. This very request of yours shows me that up to now 
we have talked at cross-purposes. If 1 let a foreigner help 
Armenians, I shall create a precedent which will admit of the 
intervention of foreign personages, and so of the countries 
they represent. I should be destroying my whole policy, since 
its object is to teach the Armenian millet the consequences of 
this longing of theirs for foreign intervention. The Armenians 
themselves would be bewildered. First I punish their seditious 
hopes and fantasies, and then I proceed to send one of their 
most influential friends to reawaken them. No, my dear Herr 
Lepsius, that’s impossible. I can’t let foreigners benefit these 
people. The Armenians must see in m their sole benefac- 
tors.” 

The pastor sank down into his chair. Lost. All over. Words 
were superfluous. If only the man were mahaous, if he were 
SatanI But he had no malice, he was not Satan; this quietly 
implacable mass-murderer was boyishly charming. Lepsius 
had begun to brood and so did not see at once the whole 
effrontery of Enver’s offer, made in a cheery, confident tone: 

“Shall I suggest something, Herr Lepsius? You get money I 
Get as much money as ever you can, from your societies, a lot 
of money— in Germany and America. Then, when you’ve col- 
lected it, bring it to me. I’ll use it all as you want it used, ac- 
cording to your suggestions. But I must point out that I can’t 
allow any supervision by Germans or other foreigners.” 

Had Johannes not been so perturbed, he would have burst 
out laughing, so amusing was the thought of those devious 
channels by which his collected funds, disposed of by Enver, 
would travel in Turkey. He did not answer. He was beaten. 
Although he had been without much hope, even before the 
interview began, he realized only now that a world lay shat- 
tered. He summoned his wits together and, to bring himself 
back to self-control, made himself look a trifle more present- 

*43 



abl^ mopped his glistening forehead several times, and stood 
up. 

"I can’t bear to think, Excdlency, that this hour which you 
have been so kind as to grant me has been quite fruitless. 
There are a hundred thousand Armenians in North Syria and 
along the coast, living far away from any battlefield. I’m sure 
Your Excellency agrees that punitive measures which have no 
object are better left in abeyance.” 

Agam the boyish Mars bared a row of smiling teeth. “You 
may be sure, Herr Lepsius, that our government will avoid all 
unnecessary harshness.” 

This on both sides had been empty formahty, an aimless 
juggling, to enable this political discussion, like every other, to 
ebb away in vague inconclusivcness. Enver had not made 
the least concession. It was still his affair what harshness he 
might think necessary. And Lepsius, too, knowing that his 
last words were meaningless, had said them merely to end 
the interview. The general, who, in contrast to the pastor, 
looked at that moment especially spick and span, stood back to 
give his visitor the pas. He even went with him a litde way 
and then, in his shghtly surprised inscrutability, watched the 
pastor’s unsteady steps bear him out of sight, down a long 
corridor, with billowing curtain-doors on cither side. 

Enver Pasha went into Talaat Bey’s office. The clerks sprang 
up. Hero-worship shone out of their faces. That almost mystic 
love had still not waned which even these paper-gentry felt 
for their dainty war god. Hundreds of boastful stories of his 
mad daring were current here m all the departments. When, 
for instance, during the war in Albania, an artillery regiment 
had mutimed, he, cigarette m mouth, had stood before the 
muzzle of a howitzer and challenged the mutineers to pull 
the firing-cord. Round Enver’s dehcate, silky features, his peo- 
ple saw a messianic aura. He was the man sent by God, who 
should re-erect the empire of Osman, Bayazid, Suleiman. The 

*44 



general greeted his clerks with a merry shout, evoking over- 
emphasized delight in them. Too-hasty hands snatched open 
the doors which led on into Talaat’s sanctum through outer 
offices. The little room seemed far too small for that Mimster’s 
crushing personality. When, as he did at this instant, this 
Hun stood up bchmd his desk, he darkened the window. 
Talaat’s mighty head was grey at the temples. Above the 
pursy lips of the Oriental there hovered a small, pitch-black 
moustache. Fat double chins thrust out of a stick-up double 
collar. A white piqu^ waistcoat, hkc the symbol of candid 
open-heartedness, curved over a jutting expanse of belly. Each 
time Talaat Bey beheld his co-rider in this duumvirate, he felt 
the urge to place his great paws in fatherly tenderness on the 
narrow shoulders of this youth blessed of the gods. Yet each 
time, the aura of glacial shyness surrounding Enver impeded 
such familiar proximity. Yet Talaat was the exuberant man 
of the world, the talker, whose heady, confident way could 
dispose of five diplomats at a time, whereas Enver, the demi- 
god of his people, the consort of an imperial princess, would 
often at great receptions stand for half an hour shyly aside, 
lost in his dreams. Talaat dropped his big, fleshy hand again 
and contented himself with a single question; “So the Ger- 
man’s been seeing you?” 

Enver Pasha turned his eyes on the Bosporus, with its jocund 
waters, its little hurrying tugs, its tiny kayiks, its cypresses, 
which looked so unconvmcing, so badly painted, at that hour 
—its theatrical ruins. Then he glanced back and let his eyes 
stray through this empty office till they paused on an old- 
fashioned Morse apparatus set on a little carpeted table, like 
some very valuable curiosity. On this wretched machine be- 
fore the Ittihad revolution had raised him up to be the first 
statesman in the Cahph’s empire, the young Talaat, the minor 
post-and-telegraph official, had fingered out Morse code. Let 
every visitor admire this proof of a giddily steep ascent, the 
reward of merit. Enver, too, seemed to view this significant 

145 



telegraph apparatus with benevolent eyes before he quite re- 
membered to answer the question. “Yes, the German! He 
tried to threaten a little, with the Reichstag.” 

This remark showed how right Monsignore Saven had 
been — how mistaken, from the very start, those humanely im- 
ploring tactics of Dr. Lepsius. A secretary brought in a sheaf 
of dispatches, which Talaat began to sign without sitting down 
agam. He did not look up as he was speaking: “These Ger- 
mans are only afraid of the odium of being made partly re- 
sponsible. But they may have to come begging to us for more 
important things than Armenians.” 

This might have ended that day’s discussion of the banish- 
ment, had Enver’s inquisitive eyes not rested on the dispatches 
in casual scrutiny. Talaat Bey noticed his glance and made the 
papers rusde as he waved them. “The precise directions for 
Aleppo. Meanwhile, I suppose, the roads will be clearer again. 
In the next few weeks Aleppo, Alexandretta, Antioch, and 
the whole coast can begin to move out.” 

“Antioch and the coast Enver repeated interrogatively, as 
though he might have something to say on the point. He did 
not speak another syllable but stared enthralled at Talaat’s fat 
fingers, which, irresistible as a storming-party, kept scribbling 
signatures under texts. These same forthright and stumpy 
fingers had composed that order, sent out to all walls and 
mutessarifs: “The goal of these deportations is annihila tion.” 
The short pen-strokes showed all the impetus of complete, 
implacable conviction; they had no scruples. 

The Minister raised up his bent torso. “That’s done. In the 
autumn I shall be able to say with perfect candour to all these 
people: 'La question armimenne n’existe pas'" 

Enver stood at the window and had not heard. Was he 
thinking of his future caliphate, which was to reach from 
Macedoma to India? Was he worried about the mumtiom 
supplies for the army? Or dreaming of fresh acquisitions for 
his magic palace on the Bosporus? In its great banqueting- 

146 



hall he had caused the wedding throne to be set up which 
Nadjieh Sultana, the Sultan’s daughter, had brought with her 
dowry. Four silver-gilt pillars and, over them, a starry canopy 
of Byzantine brocade. 

Johannes Lepsius was still creeping through the alleys of 
Istanbul. It was long past midday. He had missed his lunch. 
The pastor dared not go back to the Hotel Tokatlyan. An 
Armenian house. Terror and despair were in all its inhabitants, 
from the host and guests down to the last waiter and hft-boy. 
They knew his ways and had known of his undertaking. The 
spies and confidence men who, by order of Talaat Bey, fol- 
lowed him everywhere might track him now as much as they 
hked. It hurt him that his friends should be somewhere wait- 
ing for him in a well-considered place of security. Davidian, 
the president of the former Armenian National Assembly, 
would be one of them; an arrested person who had, however, 
managed to escape and remain illegally in Istanbul. Lepsius 
had not strength or courage to face them. The fact that he did 
not come would be enough to show them the truth, and it 
was to be hoped that by now they would have separated. Even 
the worst pessimists among them (they all were pessimists, 
and no wonder) — even they had not considered it out of the 
question that the pastor might get a permit for the interior. 
Much would have been gained by it. 

Lepsius came to a pubhc garden. Here, too, festivity. Gar- 
landed benches. Half-moon pennons duttermg out from poles 
and lamp-posts. The jam of idlers, thick, slab, unpleasant, 
oozed Its way along gravel paths between the grass-plots. 
Lepsius, dazed and unsteady, caught sight of a bench. He 
found a seat on it, beside others. A half-circle, vivid with wav- 
ing colours, curved out before him. That same instant, over 
in the grandstand, a Turkish military band burst forth with 
clashing janizary music. Cornets, flutes, raucous clarinets, 
clashing brass, ascending and descendmg the short intervals 

147 



with the sharp unity of a razor-blade, mingled with the 
fanatical yelps of taut-strung drums, the incessant clattering, 
clinking rattle of tambourines, the shivering hatred of cym- 
bals. Johannes Lepsius sat in this music up to his chin, as in 
a bath of glass splinters. But he wanted to suffer, not to free 
himself, and pressed handfuls of glass splinters into his con- 
saousness That which Enver Pasha had refused was now 
conceded him. In the long deportation convoys of this people, 
given into his charge, he dragged his way down the stony, 
marshy highroads of Anatolia. Let not his own condemn him 
— they who in the trenches of the Argonne, on the battle- 
fields of Podoha and Galicia, at sea and in the air, were bang 
decimated. Were not those endless hospital trains, at the sight 
of which a man had to cry out, more terrible still.? Had not 
the eyes of German wounded and dying become Armcman 
eyes? Lepsius, under this janizary band, let his head, dull with 
fatigue, sink lower and lower. He had not been chosen to 
care for his own, but for that which was not his. A new note 
was forcing its way into this strident, wrathful Turkish music, 
a vibrant clatter which rose and rose. And it came from 
above. A Turkish air squadron was on its way across Istanbul, 
dropping swirling clouds of proclamations. Though he could 
not tell why, it grew clear to Johannes Lepsius that these 
planes above him should be named “Original Sin and Its 
Pride.” He wandered about within this paception as he might 
have in a huge building — ^in the Ministry of the Interior. Cur- 
tains fluttacd out from before the doorways; they waved, 
hke flames, and he thought of a passage in the Apocalypse, 
which he had meant to use m his next samon: “And the 
shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto 
batde . . . and they had breast-plates, as it were breast-plates 
of iron, and the sound of their wings was as the sound of 
chariots of many horses running to battle. . . . And they had 
tails, like unto scorpions, and thae wae stings in their tails, 
and thar power was to hurt men five months.” 

148 



Johannes Lepsius started up. New means, new methods 
must be thought out. If the German Embassy failed, perhaps 
the Austrian Markgraf Pallavicini, a most distinguished man, 
might have more success. He might threaten reprisals — the 
Mohammedan Bosnians were Austro-Hungarian citizens. 
And, so far, papal admonitions had been too tepid. But then 
Enver Pasha approached him, with his never-to-be-forgotten 
smile. No — shy was not the word to describe this boyish (or 
girlish) amiability of the great mass-murderer. — ^We intend, 
Herr Lepsius, to pursue the policy of our interests to the very 
end. Only a power which stood above all interests could pre- 
vent us, a power never tainted with any rascality. If you 
should happen to turn up the name of such a power in the 
diplomat’s register, I shall be so glad to receive you again at 
the Ministry. 

Lepsius shifted and fidgeted so wildly that his veiled neigh- 
bour on the bench, becoming scared, got up to go. He did not 
notice, since now he was weighted hand and foot with his 
leaden conviction: “No more to be done.” There was no more 
help. What the priest Ter Haigasun in Yoghonoluk had 
known for weeks was just beginning now to dawn on Pastor 
Johannes Lepsius: “There’s only one thing left — ^to pray.” 

And so, amid the press of these folk on holiday, jostled by 
laughing women and squalhng brats, as the janizary music 
brayed again, as his head, with his eyes closed, rolled impo- 
tently about from side to side, the pastor folded, or at least be- 
lieved he folded, his hands, as petiuoners should. And his soul 
began speaking: “Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed 
be Thy name. . . .” 

But how had the “Our Father” changed ? Each word was a 
gulf deeper than the eye could measure. Even at the words 
“us,” “ours,” his head swirled. Who dare still say “us,” since 
Christ, who first bound the “us” together, created it, went 
to heaven on the third day? Without Him it is all no more 
than a stinkmg heap of shards and bones, as high as half the 

149 



universe. Lepsius thought of his mother, of the words which, 
after his baptism, she had written fifty-six years ago in her 
diary: “May his name, Johannes, for ever remind me that it 
is my sacred duty to bring him up a true Johannes, one who 
really loves his Lord and walks in His footsteps. . . .” Had he 
become a real Johannes? Was he really full to the brim of that 
deep trust in God which cannot be named? Alas, such trust 
threatens to crumble as the body declines. His diabetes had 
come back again. He would have to be careful what he ate. 
Above all, nothing sweet, no bread or potatoes. Perhaps Enver, 
by forbidding his journey to Anatolia, had prevented his be- 
coming any worse. But what was the hotel porter of the 
Tokatlyan doing here? And since when had he worn that 
lambskin officer’s kepi? Had Enver sent him^ Pohtely the 
porter handed him a teskere for the interior. It was an auto- 
graphed photo of Napoleon. And yes, of course, the first con- 
voy of exiles must be waiting for him outside the hotel. All 
his friends would be there, Davidian and all the others. They 
were smihng and beckoning to him. ‘‘They all look jolly well,” 
thought the pastor. And indeed the worst, most horrible reality 
has always a compensation at the heart of it, if only one can 
look at It steadily. On the banks of a river they halted, under 
wildly overhanging rocks. Why, they even had tents with 
them. Perhaps, sub rosa, Enver had made a few small conces- 
sions. When they had all lain down to rest, a tall Armenian 
man, his clothes thickly caked with slime, came over to him. 
He spoke queer, ceremonious, broken German: “See — ^this 
charming river is the Euphrates, and these are my children. 
But you are to stretch your body across it, from bank to bank, 
so that my children may have a bridge to cross by.” 

Lepsius pretended this was a joke, and retorted: “Well, you 
and your children’ll have to wait a bit, till I’ve grown a little.” 
But at once he began to grow, with delightful celerity. His 
hands and feet spread endlessly far away from him. Now he 
could fulfil the Armenian man’s request with pleasant non- 

150 



chalance. And yet, in the end, it didn’t work, because Johannes 
Lepsius lost his balance and almost shpped down o& his bench. 

“This is really terrible,” he said to himsdif, for the second 
time that day. But actually, more than anything else, what he 
meant was the thirst that tormented him. He shook himself 
hurried to the first drink-shop, and, without any thought of 
medical warnings, greedily swallowed down a sweet iced 
drink. With his enhanced sense of well-being new and cou- 
rageous plans began to invade him. “I’ll never let go,” he 
laughed absent-mindedly to himself. And this vague laugh 
was a declaration of war on Enver Pasha. 

In that same instant Talaat Bey’s private secretary was hand- 
ing the representative on duty at the Ministry of Post and Tele- 
gragh an official dispatch concerning Aleppo, Alexandretta, 
Antioch, and the coast. 




6 


The Great Assembly 

Evek since the day on which D]clal Bey, the estimable Wall of 
Aleppo, had refused to carry out in his province the govern- 
ment decrees of banishment — smce that spring day there had 
been no further hindrances, no annoying recalcitrance. 

Apart from those directly affected by it, the heaviest burden 
of this tragic measure lay on the mudirs. Their nahiyehs, the 
districts they administered, comprised wide stretches of ter- 
ritory, with scarcely a railway hne, with httle telegraphic com- 
munication, where even carriage driving along the cruellest 
highroads and tracks was an agony. So that really the mudirs 
had no choice but to sit all day and half the night in the saddle, 
till every Armenian village over every square mile of country 
had been sent packing at the proper amc. This “proper time” 
was often the midnight before the morning of setting out. It 
had been easy enough for the Wah, the Mutessarif, the Kaima- 
kam, to give their orders and “hold responsible.” In the towns 
it was child’s play. But when one had ninety-seven small dis- 
tricts, villages, hamlets, parishes, to control, it looked very 
different. So that many a mudir, who was both unable to 
work miracles and not scrupulous as to the letter of the law, 
decided without much hesitation to “forget” this or that re- 
mote village. Many mudirs were inspired by good-natured in- 
dolence. In others such easy-going imldness had in it a dash 
of cunning. These “overlookmgs” might prove remunerative, 
since the small Armenian, even the peasant, is not unprosper- 
ous. Indulgence was only perilous in districts in which' there 

15a 



was a standing gendarmerie post. The saptiehs wanted to make 
a httle themselves, and what better, more fruitful method than 
legalized plunder, at which the authorities winked both eyes? 
To be sure, the possessions of exiles were legally the property 
of the state. But the state was well aware that it had not the 
means rigidly to enforce its just claims and could see the 
advantage of not allowing the zeal of its executives to flag. 

Whereas in all provincial selamliks, cafes, baths, places of 
assembly, the progressives — all, that is to say, who read a nevi^s- 
paper, who had been to Smyrna or Istanbul and there seen, 
instead of karagos, the old-Turkish shadoW'theatre, a couple 
of French comedies, and who had heard the names “Sarah 
Bernhardt” and “Bismarck” — whereas these cultured ones, the 
highly progressive urban middle class, stood to a man behind 
Enver Pasha’s Armenian policy, the simple Turk, peasant or 
town proletarian, felt differently. Often, as he rode about his 
district, a surprised mudir would pull up in the village street, 
where he had just read out his decree of banishment, to watch 
Turks and Armenians mingle their tears. He would marvel 
as, before an Armenian house, its Turkish neighbours stood 
and wailed, calling after its dazed and tearless inhabitants, 
who without looking back were leaving the doors of their 
old home; “May God pity you!” And more, loading them 
with provisions for the road, with costly presents, a goat, or 
even a mule. The amazed mudir might even have to see these 
Turks accompany their wretched neighbours for several 
leagues. He might even behold his own compatriots casting 
themselves down before his feet, to beseech him: “Let them 
stay with us. They haven’t the true faith, but they are good. 
They are our brothers. Let them stay with us.” 

But what use was that? The very best-natured of mudirs 
could overlook no more than a few unnamed desert villages, 
where secretly he tolerated the presence of some remnant of 
the accursed race, cowering into the shelter of its own terror 
of extinction. Otherwise it went stumbling along field-paths^ 

153 



turned off on to cart-tracks, mingled and josded along the 
roads, to come at last, after days, to the great highway which 
leads south-west over Aleppo into the desert. A hesitant, 
million-footed rhythm, such as the earth had not yet known. 
The route-march of this army had been sketched out and was 
being followed with real strategic foresight. Only one depart- 
ment had been neglected by its invisible commanders— the 
commissariat. In the first few days there was still a httle bread 
and bulgur, dried wheat, available, when most had still not 
exhausted their own supplies. In these early days every adult 
had still the nght to draw from the onbashi, the paymaster- 
sergeant of the convoy, legal pay amounting to twelve paras, 
less than a penny. But most were wise enough not to make 
the demand, which could only have drawn down the hatred of 
the all-powerful upon their heads; and then, for twelve paras, 
with the cost of living risen to what it was, the most one 
could hope to buy would be a couple of oranges or one hen’s 
egg. So that with every hour the faces became more hollow, 
the million-footed steps unsteadier. Soon no other sounds 
forced their way out of this dragging throng along the roads 
than groanings, pantings, whimperings, with sometimes a 
wild, convulsive scream. With time this being shed more and 
more component parts; they sank to earth, were bundled into 
the ditches, and there perished. The saptiehs’ clubs came thud- 
ding down on the backs of hesitant throngs. For these saptiehs 
foamed with irritation. They themselves were having to hve 
like dogs till such time as they could hand over their convoys 
at the frontiers of the next kazah, the next gendarmerie dis- 
trict. At first, roll-calls were still taken. But, as death and sick- 
ness gained the upper hand, as more and more half-dead and 
corpses, especially children’s corpses, were flung into the 
ditches, this keeping of lists seemed highly onerous, and the 
onbashi relinquished superfluous scribbling. Who cared to 
know that Sarkis, Astik, or Hapeth, that Anush, Vartuhi, or 
Keren, were rotting somewhere in the open? These saptiehs 

154 



were not all brutes. It is even probable that most of them were 
good, plain, middling sort of people. But what can a saptieh 
do? He is under stnngent orders to reach such and such a 
point with his whole convoy by such and such a scheduled 
hour. His heart may be in perfect sympathy with the scream- 
ing mother who tries to snatch her child out of a ditch, flings 
herself down on the road, and claws the earth. No use to talk 
to her. She’s wasted minutes already, and it’s still six miles 
to the next halt. A convoy held up. All the faces in it twisted 
with hate. A mad scream from a thousand throats. Why did 
not these crowds, weak as they were, hurl themselves on the 
saptieh and his mates, disarm them, and tear them mto shreds? 
Perhaps the policemen were in constant terror of such as- 
sault, which would have finished them. And so — one of them 
fires a shot. The rest whip out their swords to beat the de- 
fenceless cruelly with the blades. Thirty or forty men and 
women lie bleeding. And, with this blood, another emotion 
comes to life in the excited saptiehs — their old itch for the 
women of the accursed race. In these helpless women you 
possess more than a human being— in very truth you possess 
the God of your enemy. Afterwards, the saptiehs scarcely 
know how it all had happened. 

A shifting carpet woven with the threads of blood-stained 
destinies. It is always the same. After the first few days on the 
roads all the young men and the men in the prime of life get 
separated off from the rest of the convoy. Here, for instance, a 
man of forty-six, in good clothes, an engineer. It needs many 
cudgel blows to get him away from his wife and children. His 
youngest is about one and a half. This man is to be enrolled in 
a labour battalion, for road-making. He stumbles in the long 
line of men and shuffles, gibbering hke a half-wit: “I never 
missed paying my bedel . . . paying my bedel.” Suddenly he 
grips hold of his neighbour. “You’ve never seen such a lovely 
baby.” ... A torrent of sentimental agony. “Why, the girl 
had eyes as big as plates. If only I could. I'd crawl after them 

*55 



on my belly like a snake." And he shuffles on, enveloped in 
his grief, completely isolated. That evemng they he down to 
rest on a hillside. Long after midmght he shakes the same 
neighbour out of his sleep. “They’re ^1 dead now.” He is per- 
fectly calm. 

In another convoy a husband and wife. Both still quite 
young. The bridegroom’s upper lip has scarcely a trace of 
down on it. Their hour is approaching, since all the active 
men arc to be separated. The bride gets an inspiration to dis- 
guise her young husband in women’s clothes. These two 
children have already begun to laugh, delighted at the happy 
disguise. But the others warn them against any premature 
triumph. On the outskirts of a big town some strange chettehs, 
armed roughs, come out to meet them. They are out on a 
woman-hunt. Among several others, they choose the bride 
She clings fast to her husband. “For God’s sake, leave me 
with her. My sister is deaf-mute. She needs me.” “That’s no 
reason, janum, little soul! The fair one shall come with you.” 
The couple get taken off to a filthy hut And there the truth 
is soon made mamfest. The chettehs kill the young man in- 
stantly, and mutilate his corpse in a fiendish mockery of the 
disguise which he had assumed. Then, after the most horrible 
abuse, the girl is tied naked to her groom — ^face to face with 
his mutilated corpse. 

A shifting carpet, woven of fives which none can unravel. 

. . . There, again and again, the mother who for days carries 
her child, dead of starvation, in a sack on her shoulders, until 
at last, unable any longer to bear the stench, her own people 
complain to the saptiehs. There, too, the crazed mothers of 
Kcmakh, who, bawling hymns and with sparkling eyes, as 
though this were a blessed work in the sight of God, cast their 
children down from a rock into the Euphrates. Again and 
again some bishop, some vartabed, approaches. He gathers up 
and spreads out his robes, casts himself down before the 

156 



mudir, sobs: “Have pity, Effendi, on these innocent.” And the 
mudir has to give the official answer: “Priest, do not meddle in 
politics! The government respects the church. I am only con- 
cerned with you in ecclesiastical matters.” 

In many convoys nothing m particular seems to be hap- 
pening, no apparent suffering, only hunger, thirst, wound^ 
feet, and disease. And yet one day a German deaconess stood 
outside the hospital of Marash, at which she had just arrived 
to go on duty. An endless, mute convoy of Armenians came 
dragging onwards past the hospital, and she stood waiting to 
let them pass. She could not manage to stir till the last had 
vanished. Something which she herself could not understand 
had begun to stir in this nursing-sister — ^not pity, no, and not 
horror cither; something vast and unknown, almost exulta- 
tion. That evening she wrote home to her people: “I ran into 
a long convoy of exiles, who had only just been turned out 
of their villages and were still in quite a good state. I had 
to wait a long time to let them get past me, and I never shall 
forget what they looked like. Only a sprinkling of men, the 
rest all women and children. A lot of them had light hair and 
great blue eyes, which stared at me with such deathly solem- 
nity, such unconscious grandeur in them, that they might have 
been the angels of the Last Judgment." These poor avenging 
angels had come from Zeitun, Marash, Aintab, and the vilayet 
of Adana. They came plodding down from the north, from 
the provinces of Sivas, Trebizond, Erzerum. They came out of 
the east, from Kharput and the Kurd-mfested Diarbckr, from 
Urfa and Bitlis. Before the Taurus, before Aleppo had been 
reached, they all mingled in the one endless, shifting carpet 
of lives. And yet in Aleppo itself nothing had happened, nor 
in the teemmg sanjaks and kazahs of its vilayet. The coast 
lay peaceful and untouched. Musa Dagh was at peace. The 
mountain seemed not to notice this gruesome pilgrimage 
which passed not so very far away. 

157 



Gabuel Baoraoian pursued his investigations in the villages. 
He even extended their scope. Southwards he often got as far 
as Suedia, and northwards, after several hours’ ride, he once 
even touched Beilan, that deserted viUa-pleasaunce of nch Ar- 
menians from Alexandretta. He only dared one other journey 
to Antioch. Gabriel found the ancient doors of the Agha 
Rifaat Bereket’s mansion closed. He pounded the knocker 
several times against the copper-inlaid wood, but nobody an- 
swered. So the Agha was not back yet from Aleppo. Though 
Gabriel knew he was travelhng in aid of the Armenians, the 
absence of this friend of his father depressed him. 

On his return he decided that henceforth in all his jour- 
neyings he would not go beyond the farthest precincts of Musa 
Dagh. Some compelling magic emanating from the mountain 
of his fathers, becoming stronger and stronger the longer he 
stayed here, forced him to this. The same solemn amazement 
still descended on him as each morning he opened his window 
wide to greet the mountain. He could not understand. The 
huge mass of Musa Dagh, changing its aspect every hour, 
now firmly compressed, now almost on the point of evapora- 
tion into downy sunlight — ^the very essence of this mountain, 
eternal amid all this mutabihty, seemed to renew Gabriel’s 
strength and give him courage for the torturing hither and 
thither of thoughts which had robbed him of sleep ever since 
the arrival of Pastor Tomasian. But the instant he left the 
shadow of Musa Dagh the courage to think such thoughts 
dabed out of him. Meanwhile, his industrious excursions 
through the villages had born good fruit. He got what he was 
after — ^not only a fairly consistent general notion of the day- 
to-day hves of the peasants, frmt-growers, silk-spmners, 
weavers, beekeepers, and wood-carvers, but many glimpses 
into the more closed circles of their minds, into the nature 
of their family relationships. Not that it was easy. At first 
many of these country folk could only see a wealthy foreigner, 
no matter how much he might be bound to them by racial 

158 



ties and common ownership. But with time their trust in 
him grew, and even a secret hope they had of him. The 
effendi was, to be sure, a powerful man, who knew foreign 
parts and was feared by the Turks because of his in- 
fluence. As long as he stayed on in Yoghonoluk, the worst 
might perhaps be spared the villages. No one scrutinized 
the real worth of such hopes. But another instinct helped to 
feed them. Though Gabriel spoke as httle of the future as 
they themselves, many could sense, in his eyes, his restlessness, 
his gestures — in the notes which he kept taking — some purpose- 
ful thought, a special activity, which distinguished hun from 
everyone else. All their eyes were on him when he came among 
them. He was asked into many houses. Though the rooms 
were bare, according to Eastern custom, their clean comfort 
always surprised him. The clay floors were strewn with clean 
carpets. Divans covered with pleasant rugs took the place of 
chairs. Only in the poorest houses were the stables anywhere 
near the living-room. The walls were by no means bare. Old 
illustrations and little pictures saved from calendars were 
pinned up beside the pictures of the saints. Many housewives 
decorated their rooms with cut flowers — a very unusual habit 
in the East — laid out as a rule in flat dishes. When the guest 
was seated, a big wooden stand would be set before him, on 
which were placed the wide tin dishes of cakes, honey-fingers, 
and sweet cheese biscuits. Gabriel could remember their taste 
from his childhood. In those days they had been forbidden 
luxuries, since his parents were not supposed to know that 
the servants took young Master Gabriel into village houses. 
But, now that they were being heaped upon him, Gabriel’s 
digestion began to protest, especially when they insisted on 
bringing melon slices and sugared fruit into the bargain. To 
have refused would have been an outrageous breach of hospi- 
tality, so he, the guest, in self-defence, had to keep giving 
dainties to the children whom they always brought in to be 
introduced, and occasionally munching a sweet himself. It 

*59 



moved him to sec how clean and well looked-after these chil- 
dren were, the smallest especially. The mothers took their 
greatest pride in the cleanness o£ the httle white smocks, tiny 
coats and aprons. Later, as these children grew up, even they, 
it is true, could not keep their boys from running wild, on 
warlike expeditions after booty, over Musa Dagh and into the 
gorges of the Damlayik. 

Gabriel made many friends m these frequent excursions into 
the villages. The closest of them all was the staid, respectable 
Chaush Nurhan, or, more correctly, Sergeant Nurhan. Next 
to the elder Tomasian, this Chaush Nurhan owned the best 
craftsman’s business south of Yoghonoluk — he was a smith 
and locksmith and besides owned a saddlery, a carnage- 
bmlding establishment in which he built the kangnis used in 
these parts, and finally, a holy of holies, a shop wheie he 
worked alone, without any witnesses. Initiates knew that in 
secret he repaired hunting-rifies and made the cartridges for 
them. But his occupation was best kept secret from Ah Nassif’s 
inquisitive eyes. 

Chaush Nurhan was an ex-regular. He had served seven 
years in the Turkish army, which he had spent in the war and 
in an Anatolian infantry regiment in the huge barracks at 
Brussa. He looked the hardened regular that he was, with his 
straight, iron-grey moustache twisted into very long points, 
his continual, forceful use of army expletives, and above all his 
stiff respectfulness with Bagradian, whom he greeted only 
as his superior officer. He may perhaps have sensed certain 
qualities in Gabriel, who did not himself know he possessed 
them. Chaush Nurhan, who had already worked for the 
younger Avetis, agreed to inspect the extensive gun-room of 
the villa and make sure that everything was ship-shape. He 
took away the guns to dismember and oil them in his secret 
workshop. Gabriel often came to see him at work. Sometimes 
he would bring Stephan with him. They remimsced about the 
army lik<f keen professionals. The chaush was full of coarse 

i6o 



barrack-room stories and quirks, of which the bel esprit Ga- 
briel never weaned. So that, incredibly, m these months of 
bamshment, two Armenian men became engrossed m their 
memories of Turkish army life as though they had been in a 
Turkish barracks. Chaush Nurhan was a widower, like old 
Tomasian. But he had a promising brood of half-grown chil- 
dren, whom he himself seemed to find it hard to distinguish. 
He scarcely ever troubled his head with his progeny. This 
erstwhile tyrant of recruits, with the awe-inspiring, iron-grey 
moustache, was placid good nature itself when it came to his 
own flesh and blood, and he let them run wild without a 
qualm. In the evenings, when his only journeyman had handed 
over the workshop keys, he neither entered his own house, 
full of children, nor knocked at any neighbour’s door. With a 
pitcher of wine in one hand, m the other an infantry cornet, 
pilfered from a quartermaster’s store, he would go into his 
apricot orchard. There, in the dusk, unsteady howhngs rent 
the air. They were well known to the other villagers. Turkish 
bugle-calls, halting and kicking, would rattle forth, as though, 
before night came, Chaush Nurhan meant to rally the folk in 
all the villages. 

There had been some slight disagreement on educational 
policy in the villages. The scholastic programme of the Miazial 
Engerutiunk Hayoz, the General Armenian Schools Associa- 
tion, that recognized scholastic authority for the whole Arme- 
nian people, had laid it down that the school year was to end in 
the first days of early summer — that is to say, in the first week 
of May. But Ter Haigasun, as district head-superintendent 
of schools, gave sudden orders that this year teaching was 
to begin again after only one short week of holidays. The 
priest’s decision sprang from the same motives as did the dully 
frantic industry of the whole population m these days. The del- 
uge was at hand. This approaching dissolution of all order 
must be opposed by twice the normal regularity; utter help- 

i6i 



lessness, which all awaited as something inevitably should be 
countered by the severest order and discipline. And besidey in 
these harassed days, the wild, unconscious clamour of children 
on holiday would have been an unbearable nuisance about the 
land. And clearly every grown-up in the district would have 
sided with Ter Haigasun, had the teachers not bitterly op- 
posed him. These teachers, above all Hrand Oskanian, did 
not want to be robbed of their free time, guaranteed them by 
contract. They appealed to the mukhtars, they warned the 
parents — the poor little mites would be getting brain-fever if 
they had to work on in this grilling heat. Oskanian, the ever- 
silent, vented a perfect torrent of spite against Ter Haigasun. 
It was all no good. The priest was inflexible. He called a meet- 
ing of the seven mukhtars of the vdlages and convinced them 
in a few short words. So that the new school year, in spite 
of the heat, began more or less where the old had ended. The 
teachers, as a last resource, tried to bring in Bagradian on their 
side. Shatakhian and Oskanian, serious and formal, called at 
the viUa. But Gabriel plainly and ruthlessly declared for the 
continuation of studies. He welcomed it, not only as a matter 
of general policy, but in his own interests, since he meant to 
send his son Stephan to school with Monsieur Shatakhian. 
He should at last be able to mix with boys of his race and 
age. 

On the first day of term Gabriel arnved at the school-house 
of Yoghonoluk with Stephan. Sato came, too; her wounded 
feet were already healed. It had meant a tilf with Juliette. She 
was worried about Stephan, she told him. Why should he have 
to squat on the same benches as these unwashed boys in an 
Oriental stable? Even in Pans, Stephan had never had to go 
to the public primary school, where after all there had been less 
danger of infectious disease and lice. Gabriel had stuck to his 
decision. If one looked at things as they really were, such 
dangers as that, which any day now might give way to real 
ones, were certainly not worth taking seriously. As a father he 

xfia 



considered it far more important that Stephan should at last 
get to know the life of his people from its beginnings. In 
former days, in another atmosphere, Juliette could have raised 
a hundred objections. As it was, she gave in at once and said 
no more. It was a silent acquiescence which she herself could 
understand least of all. Ever since that talk in the night, when 
Gabriel had seemed so very upset, something incomprehensible 
had been happening. Life on a basis of mutual confidence — 
the gathered harvest of a marriage that had gone on now for 
fourteen years — seemed to evaporate more and more. At pres- 
ent, when Juliette woke in the night, she felt as though she 
and the sleeper beside her were no longer sharmg the same 
past. Their marriage had been left behind in Pans, in glittering 
towns all over Europe; they had lost it, were cut off, it was 
theirs no longer. What was this thing that had been happen- 
ing? Had Gabriel altered, or had she? She could still not take 
the future possibility really seriously. It seemed to her almost 
absurd that a deluge should not gallantly retire from before 
her feet— the Frenchwoman. Surely it was simply a question 
of getting through the next few we^s. And then— back home! 
Whatever might or might not happen in these weeks was 
trivial child’s play. So she said no more about Gabriel’s de- 
cision that Stephan should go to the village school. Yet when 
in her most secret soul she suddenly was aware of that tepid 
sensation — “Oh, well, what business is it of mine?” — she felt 
starded and stirred to an unknown grief, not only for herself 
but for Stephan. 

Young Stephan naturally rejoiced at the very thought of 
this new arrangement. Lately, as he admitted to his father, he 
had scarcely been able to fix his mind oq what the good Avak- 
ian was saying. He, the boy from the Paris lyc&, the Hellea- 
ist and Latinist, much preferred an Armenian village schooL 
Such complaisance was not due merely to the boredom of 
Stephan’s lessons with Avakian. His very soul had become 
confused, and yet alert, ever since Iskuhi and Sato had been 

163 



their guests. Sato had already got him into mischief. One 
morning she and Stephan had suddenly vanished into the 
wilds, not coming back till well after lunch. Since Sato seemed 
to be threatened with dire consequences, Stephan had gallantly 
taken all the blame, insisting that they had lost their way on 
the Damlayik. Juliette had “made a scene” not only with 
Avakian, but also with Gabriel, and had forbidden her son so 
much as to speak to Sato in future. The waif had been ban- 
ished from the drawing-room and told to stay in her room 
when she was home. All the more frequently therefore had 
Stephan found himself drawn to Iskuhi, who was still not 
cured, though she too had long been out of bed. He would 
squat at her feet as she lay in a deck chair in the garden. He 
had so many things to ask her. Iskuhi had to tell him all about 
Zeitun. Yet whenever Maman came upon them, they were 
silent as a pair of conspirators. “How they all draw him to 
them'” reflected Juliette. 

The school-house of Yoghonoluk was imposing. As the 
largest school of the Musa Dagh district, it comprised four 
classes. Ter Haigasun had entrusted their superintendence to 
Shatakhian. That teacher, on his own initiative, had added 
continuation classes to those of the usual village school. In 
these he taught French and history while Oskanian taught ht- 
erature and calligraphy But even this was not enough. There 
were evening classes for grown-ups Here such a universal sage 
as Apothecary Krikor displayed his light. He lectured on stars, 
flowers, beasts, on geology, and on the nations, poets, and 
sages of antiquity. As his habit was, he drew no clear distinc- 
tions between these things, but bathed them all in the efful- 
gence of one magnificent fairy-tale of science. 

Shatakhian drew Gabriel aside. “I don’t quite understand 
you, Effendi. What can you expect your son to learn here? 

I should say he knew more than I do about most subjects, 
though I did study for some time in Switzerland. But I’ve 
vegetated here for years. Just look at all these children. They’re 

164 



like Hottentots. I don’t know whether they’ll be a good in* 
fluence.” 

“It’s just their influence that I don’t want him to miss, 
Hapeth Shatakhian,’’ Gabriel explained — and the teacher won- 
dered at this father who seemed so stubbornly set on turnmg 
his son from a good European into a little Oriental. 

The room was full of children and of parents come to enter 
their names. An old woman, pushing a little boy in front of 
her, approached Shatakhian. “Well, Teacher, here he is. Don’t 
thrash him too much.’’ 

“You hear?” Shatakhian turned to Gabriel, with a sigh over 
this wilderness of superstition, medievalism, and darkness of 
the spirit, which he had to spend such laborious days in com- 
bating. 

It was arranged that Stephan should come to school three 
times a week. His chief task would be to put the finishing 
touches to his written and spoken Armenian. Sato was con- 
signed to the infant’s class, composed mostly of girls and all 
much younger than the sorry orphan of Zeitun. Even after his 
second day at school Stephan came home in a very bad temper. 
He wasn’t going to let them go on ragging him about these 
stupid English clothes. He was going to wear exactly the same 
as all the others. In a towering rage he msisted that the local 
tador should be commissioned to make him the usual entari- 
smock, with an aghil-belt, and the loose shalwar-trousers. 
These demands entailed a long dispute with Maman. It re- 
mained undecided for several days. 

Now that he had no Stephan to teach, Samuel Avakian had 
another, entirely different occupation. Gabriel passed him all 
the rough notes which he had been collecting for many weeks 
and asked the student to reduce them to one comprehensive, 
statisucal statement. Avakian was not told why. His first job 
was to classify under various headings the population of all the 
villages, from Wakef, the lace Village in the south to Kebus- 



siye, the bee-keeping village in the north. The information 
gathered by Bagradian from the village clerk of Yoghonoluk 
and the other six village dders was to be arranged and 
checked. By next morning Avakian had the following precise 
table for Gabriel: 

Population of the seven villages, classified according to sex 
and age: 

583 babes in arms and children under 4 years of age 

579 girls between 4 and 12 

823 boys between 4 and 14 

2074 females . . over 12 

1556 males over 14 

This census included the Ba^adian family, with dependants. 
But, besides such lists, more exact classifications were drawn 
up, giving the number of famihes in each village according to 
occupation or craft, indeed from every conceivable angle. But 
it was not only a matter of human beings. Gabriel had tried 
to find out the number of head of cattle in the district. That 
had been by no means an easy task, an only partially success- 
ful one, since not even the mukhtars knew the exact figures. 
Only one thing was certain. There were no big hvestock, no 
oxen or horses. On the other hand, every well-to-do family 
owned a couple of goats and a donkey, or a riding and sump- 
ter mule. The larger herds of sheep, owned by individual 
breeders or communes, were driven, in the fashion of all moun- 
taineers, up on to the quiet meadow pasturage — sheltered 
meadows where they stayed from one shearing to the next 
in the care of shepherds and shepherds’ boys. It proved im- 
possible to get any exact idea of these herds. The industrious 
Avakian, to whom every task was a boon, went zealously forth 
into the villages and had already transformed Bagradian’s 
study into a kind of statistics bureau. Secredy he rather scoffed 

166 



at this very elaborate hobby, by which a rich man was at* 
tempting to fill up the days of an indefinite period of suspense. 
Nodiing seemed too triihng for this pedant, who had obviously 
conceived the idea of writing a scientific memoir on the village 
life around Musa Dagh. He even wanted to know how many 
tonirs, kneading-troughs walled into the ground, there were 
in the villages. He investigated the harvests minutely and 
fieemed to be worried by the fact that the mountain folk im- 
ported their maize and the reddish Syrian wheat from Moham- 
medans down in the plain. It seemed to annoy him that there 
should be no Armenian mills, either in Yoghonoluk and Bitias 
or elsewhere. He even ventured to trespass on Krikor’s pre- 
serve and inquire as to the state of the drug supplies. Krikor, 
who had expected to display his hbrary, not his pharmacy, 
traced the curve of the roof with a pair of disillusioned fingers. 
On two small shelves bottles, jars, and crucibles of all kinds 
were set out, painted with exotic inscriptions. It was all there 
was to suggest a chemist’s shop. Three big petroleum jars in 
a corner, a sack of salt, a couple of bales of chibuk-tobacco, and 
some cheap ironmongery indicated the more active side of the 
business. 

Krikor proudly tapped one of the mystic jars with his long 
bony fingers. “The whole pharmacopoeia, as St. John Chrysos- 
tom pointed out, can be reduced to seven primary substances: 
hme, sulphur, saltpetre, iodine, poppy, willow-resin, and bay- 
oil. It’s always the same thmg in hundreds of different dis- 
guises.” 

After such a lesson in contemporary pharmaceutics Gabriel 
made no further inquiries. Luckily he had a fairly extenuve 
medicine chest of his own. But, more sigmficant than all this, 
was the incident of the small-arms. Chaush Nurhan had al- 
ready dropped some dark hints on the subject. Yet, the instant 
Gabriel tried to broach it with village notables, they beat 
hasty retreat. One day, however, he assailed Mukhtar Kebus- 
syan of Yoghonoluk m his best parbur and pinned him down: 

I&7 



“Be frank with me, Thomas Kebussyan. How many rifles 
have you, and what pattern are they?” 

The mukhtar began to squint hornbly, and wagged his bald 
pate. “Jesus Christ! Do you want to bring lU-luck on us all, 
Eifcndi?” 

“Why should I, of all people, seem so unworthy of your 
confidence?” 

“My wife doesn’t know it, my sons don’t know it, not even 
the schoolteachers know it. Not a soul.” 

“Did my brother Avetis?” 

“Your brother Aveus certainly did, God rest his soul. But 
he never mentioned it to anyone.” 

“Do I look the sort of person who can’t keep his mouth 
shut?” 

“If It comes out, we shall all be slaughtered.” 

But since Kebussyan, for all his squintings and waggings of 
the head, could not manage to get away from his guest, he 
ended at last by double-bolting the parlour door. In a fright- 
ened hiss he told his story. In 1908, when Ittihad had gone over 
to revolution against Abdul Hamid, the Young Turkish agents 
had distributed weapons to all districts and communes of the 
empire, especially to the Armeman districts, which were re- 
garded as the chief supporters of the revolt. Enver Pasha had 
of course known all about it and, when war broke out, his 
instant order had been to disarm the Armenian population. 
Naturally the character and methods of the government 
officials concerned had made a great difference to the way 
in which the order was carried out. In such vilayets as Erzerum 
or Sivas, hotbeds of provincial zeal for Ittihad, unarmed people 
had been forced to buy rifles from the gendarmes, simply to 
hand them back to the government. To possess no arms in 
such a district was merely considered a cunning attempt to 
evade the law. But here, under Djelal Bey, it naturally had 
all gone far more smoothly. That admirable governor, whose 

x6g 



humane instincts were always in rebellion against the edicts 
of the pretty war god in Istanbul, carried out such orders very 
negligently, where he could not simply allow them to dis- 
appear in his waste-paper basket. This mildness usually found 
Its echo in the administrative methods of his subordinates, 
with one harsh exception — ^the Mutessarif of Marash. The 
red-haired mudir of Antioch had arrived one day in January 
in Yoghonoluk, with the chief of the Antioch police, to collect 
all weapons. He had gone away again qmte peacefully on 
receiving the smiling assurance that no such weapons had 
been distributed. Luckily the mukhtar of those days had not 
given the Committee’s agents a written receipt. 

"Very good” — Gabriel was delighted with the mayor — ^“and 
arc these guns worth anything?” 

“Fifty Mauser rifles and two hundred and fifty Greek 
servicc<arbines. Each has thirty magazines of cartridges, that 
IS, about a hundred and fifty shots.” 

Gabriel Bagradian stood reflecting. Really that was scarcely 
worth talking about. Had the men in the villages no other 
firearms of any kind? 

Kebussyan hesitated again. “That’s their business. Lots of 
them hunt. But what use are a few hundred old blunder- 
busses, with flint locks?” 

Gabriel rose, and held out his hand to the mukhtar. “Thank 
you, Thomas Kebussyan, for having trusted me. But, now 
that I know, I’d like you to tell me where you’ve hidden them.” 

“Must you really know that, EfFendi?” 

“No. But I’m curious, and I don’t see why you should keep 
that secret, now that you’ve told me all the rest.” 

The mukhtar writhed in inner conflict. Apart from his 
brothers in office. Ter Haigasun, and the sexton, there was not 
a soul who knew that secret. Yet there was something in 
Gabriel against which Kebussyan could not hold out. He 
unb'irdened himself, after desperate admoniuons. The chests 

169 



containing these rifles and supplies were in the chiirchyard of 
Yoghonoluk, buried in what seemed the usual graves, with 
false inscriptions on the crosses. 

“So now I’ve put my life in your hands, Effendi,” the 
mukhtar moaned as he opened the door agam for his visitor. 
Gabriel answered him without turning round: 

“Perhaps you really have, Thomas Kebussyan.” 

Thoughts at which he himself began to tremble kept haunt* 
ing Gabriel Bagradian. They had such power to move his 
heart that he could not escape them, day or night. Gabriel saw 
only the first steps, only the patting of the ways. Five paces 
on from where they branched, and all was darkness and un- 
certainty. But in every hfe, as it nears decision, nothmg seems 
more unreal than its own aim. 

Yet was it easy to understand why Gabriel, with all his 
roused-up energy, should have moved only about this narrow 
valley, avoiding any avenue of escape that might still have 
been open to him? Why are you wasting time, Bagradian? 
Why let day after day slip by? Your name is well known, and 
you have a fortune. Why not throw both these into the scales? 
Even though you are faced with danger and the greatest 
difiiculues, why not try to reach Aleppo, with Juliette and 
Stephan? After all, Aleppo is a big town. You have connexions 
there. At least you can put your wife and son under consular 
protection. No doubt they’ve been arresting notables every- 
where, banishing them, torturing them, putting them to death. 
Such a journey would certamly be a terrible risk. But is it 
any less of a risk to stay here? Don’t lose another mmme, do 
something before it’s too late to save yourself I . . . 

This voice was not always silent. But its cries came muted. 
Musa Dagh stood serene. Nothing changed. The world around 
seemed to show that the Agha Rifaat Bereket had been right. 
Not a breath of outside trouble reached the village. His home^ 
which even now he could still sometimes m istake for a van- 

vp 



ished fairy-tale^ kept fast bold of Gabriel Bagradian. Juliette 
lost reality in bis eyes. Perhaps, even if be bad tried, be might 
not have freed himself now from Musa Dagh. 

He kept his solemn promise not to say a word of the hidden 
small-arms. Even Avakian had learned nothing. On the other 
hand that tutor was suddenly given a fresh task. He was 
appointed cartographer. That map of the Damlayik which 
Stephan, with clumsy markings, had begun early in March, 
to please his father, gained fresh significance. Avakian was 
instructed to make an exact, large-scale map of the mountain 
in three copies. “So he’s come to the end of the valley, with 
all its hvestock and people,” thought the student, “and now 
he has to go to the hills.” The Damlayik is, of course, the real 
heart of Musa Dagh. That spur of mountain disperses itself 
in many ridges towards the north, where they peter out in 
the vale of Beilan in dream-like natural citadels and terraces, 
while southwards it suddenly descends, disordered, embryonic, 
into the plains around the mouth of the Orontes. In its centre, 
Damlayik, it gathers all its strength, its concentrated purpose. 
Here, with mighty fists of rock, it drags the vale of the seven 
villages, like a many-folded coverlet, to its breast. Here its two 
crests rise almost sheer over Yoghonoluk and Hadji Habibli — 
the only treeless points, grown over with short crop-grass. 
The back of the Damlayik forms a fairly wide mountain 
plateau; at its widest point, between the ilex gorge and the 
steep, shelvmg rocks along the coast, it is, as the crow flies 
(by Avakian’s reckomng), more than three and a hal f miles 
across. But what most of all preoccupied Avakian were the 
curiously sharp demarcauon lines which nature seemed to 
have set round this mountain plateau. There was, first, the 
indentation towards theliorth, a narrow defile laced to a ridge 
between two peaks, even directly approachable from the vad- 
ley by an old mule-track, which, however, lost itself in under- 
growth, since here there was no possibihty of reachmg the sea 
across walls of rock. In the south, where the mountain broke 

171 



oflE suddenly, there rose, above a sparse, almost and half-circle 
of rocky banks, a towering mass of rock fifty feet high. The 
view from this natural bastion dominated a sweep of sea and 
the whole plain of the Orontes with its Turkish villages as 
far as away beyond the heights of the barren Jebel Akra. One 
could see the massive ruin of the temple and aqueduct of 
Seleucia, bent under the load of its green creepers; one could 
see every cart-rut on the important highroad from Antioch to 
£1 Eskel and Suedia. The white domino-houses of these towns 
gleamed, and the big spirit factory on the right bank of the 
Orontes, in nearest proximity to the sea, stood livid m sun- 
light. Every strategic intelligence must perceive at once what 
an ideal place of defence the Damlayik was. Apart from the 
arduous climb up the side facmg the valley, which exhausted 
even leisurely sight-seers by its rough, uncompromising ascent, 
there was only one real point of attack — the narrow ridge 
towards the north. But it was just here that the terrain offered 
defenders a thousand advantages, and not least the circum- 
stance that the treeless declivities, strewn about with knee-pine, 
dwarf shrubs, tussock grass, and wild bush growths of every 
kind, provided a difficult series of obstacles. 

Avakian’s map-drawing efforts took a long ume to satisfy 
Gabriel. Again and again he discovered fresh mistakes and 
inadequacies. The student began to be afraid that his em- 
ployer’s hobby had little by little become a mania. He had 
still no inklmg. Now they spent whole days on the Damlayik. 
Bagradian, the artillery officer of the Balkan war, still possessed 
field-glasses, a measuring-gauge, a magnetic compass, and 
other, similar surveying-instruments. They came in very useful 
now. With stubborn insistence he made certain that the course 
of every stream, each tall tree, big block of granite, was being 
marked. And red, green, and blue markings did not suffice 
him. Strange words and signs were added. Between the dome- 
shaped peaks and the northern saddle there was a very ex- 
tensive gentle declivity. Smee it was overgrown with lush and 

172 



excellent grass, it was here that they always found themselves 
in the midst of herds of sheep, black and white, with shepherds 
who, like the shepherds of antiquity, drowsed above their 
flocks in sheepskins, summer and winter. Gabriel and 
Avakian, counting their steps, got the exact boundaries of this 
pasturage. Gabriel pointed out two streams which, above, on 
the verge of the meadow, forced their way through thick 
growths of fern. “That’s very lucky,” he said; “write above 
that, in red pencil: ‘town enclosure.’” There was no end of 
such secret terminology. Gabriel seemed to be looking with 
particular zest for some spot which he would choose for its 
quiet, sheltered beauty. He found it. And it, too, was near a 
well-spring, but nearer the sea, in a place between high pla- 
teaux of sheer rock, where a dark-green girdle of myrtles 
and rhododendron bushes extended. 

“Pick that out, Avakian, and write over it, in red: ‘Three 
Tent Square.’” 

Avakian could not manage not to ask: “What do you mean 
by ‘Three-Tent Square’?” 

But Gabriel had already gone on and did not hear him. 

“Must I help him dream his dreams ?” the student thought. 
Yet only two days later he was to learn exactly what was 
meant by “Three-Tent Square.” 

When Dr. Altouni took the bandages off Iskuhi’s arm and 
shoulder, he sounded morose: “Just as I thought. Now, if we 
were in a big town, it could still be set right You ought to 
have stayed in Aleppo, light of my eyes, and gone into hos- 
pital there. Still, perhaps you were right to come on here. 
Who can predict, in times hke these.? Now, my soul, you 
mustn’t get depressed — we’ll sec what else we can do.” 

Iskuhi paafied the old gendeman. “I’m not worrying. It’s 
lucky it should be my left arm.” But she did not believe the 
doctor’s feeble reassurances. She glanced down swifdy at 
herself. Her arm hung hmp, distorted, too short for the shoul- 



der. She could not move it. At least she was glad it no 
longer hurt her. So that now, she supposed, she would be a 
cripple all her life. But what did that matter, when she con- 
sidered the fate of most of the convoy? And she had only 
been with them two short daysl (She, too, like all those people, 
was now deeply aware that she had no future.) In the night 
she was still in the midst of horrible sounds and terrifying 
images. The shuffling, scrapmg, creeping, tapping of thou- 
sands of feet. Exhausted, whimpering children fell to the 
ground, and she with her broken arm had to snatch up two or 
three of them at a time. Crazy shrieks from the end of the 
column, and already saptiehs with bloodshot eyes, brandishing 
cudgels, came dashing furiously. Everywhere the face of the 
man who had tried to rape her. It was not made of one, but 
thirty different faces; many of them she knew by sight, and 
they were of people who had not even seemed repugnant. But 
mosdy it was a filthy, stubbled face, spotted with blood, that 
kept bending over her. Bubbles of spittle broke on the tumid 
lips. ... In such detailed clarity could she see that kaleido- 
scopic surface larger than life. It bent above her and en- 
veloped her in an anaesthetic vapour of oniony breath. She 
fought, fleshed her teeth in hairy, simian hands, which closed 
on her breasts. I’ve only got one arm, she reflected, as though 
it were a kind of extenuauou to the fact that she surrendered 
to this horror, and so lost consaousness. 

The days that followed such nights were like those of a 
malaria patient, whose temperature runs down without transi- 
tions from high fever to well below normal. Then there would 
be a veil upon her senses, and perhaps that was the reason 
why she took her misfortune so easily. Her lame arm hung at 
her side like an impediment. But her body, young and full 
of sap, surmounted its hurt more skilfully, day by day. With- 
out quite knowing how she managed it, she accustomed her- 
self to doing everything with her right hand. It pacified her 
deeply to think she needed no help from anyone. 



Iskuhi had by now been living some time with the Bagrad- 
ians. A short while back, Pasmr Aram Tomasian had called, 
thanked them for all their kindness to his sister, and an- 
nounced that he had come to take her away. He had furnished 
an empty house near his father’s. The suggestion deeply 
wounded Gabriel. “But why. Pastor Aram, do you want to 
deprive us of Iskuhi? We’re all so fond of her — my wife more 
than anyone.” 

“Visitors who stay too long end by becoming a nuisance.” 

“Please don’t be so proud. You know yourself that Mademoi- 
selle Iskuhi is the kind of person whom, unfortunately, one 
notices all too httle in the house, she’s so quiet and reserved. 
And then, aren’t we all sharing the same fate here ? . . 

Aram glanced slowly at Gabriel. “I hope you don’t imagine 
our fate to be rosier than it is in reality.” These carping words 
had in them a kmd of suspiaon of the foreigner, of this 
rich man, who seemed to have no idea of the horrors by 
which he lived surrounded. 

But this very mistrustful reserve made Bagradian feel in- 
tensely friendly. His voice sounded cordial: “I only wish you 
were staying with us, too. Pastor Aram Tomasian. But I beg 
that, whenever you feel like it, you’ll come in and see us. 
I’ll give orders that from today they always lay two extra 
places for you and your wife. Please don’t let my invitation 
annoy you, and come here to meals if it isn’t too much exer- 
tion for her.” 

Juliette showed even more reluctance to let Iskuhi move 
into other quarters. A very curious relationship had arisen 
between these two women, nor can it be denied that Juliette 
sought the favours of the Armenian girl. Iskuhi, for a girl of 
nineteen, was still strangely unawakened, especially for the 
East, where women npen so early. In Madame Bagradian this 
young girl saw only a grande dame, iniinitcly above her in 
beauty, background, and knowledge of life. When they sat 
together in Juliette’s room upstairs, Iskuhi, even in such in- 

175 



timacy, seemed unable to conquer her shyness. Perhaps, at 
such moments, she also sufiered from the idleness to which 
she was condemned. Juliette, on her side, seeking Iskuhi, 
never felt quite certain of herself when they were together. 
This seems absurd, and yet it was so. There are people who 
need in no way be distinguished, either by position or per- 
sonahty, and who yet infect us with a feeling of timidity in 
their presence. Perhaps that constraint which always seemed 
to get hold of Juliette in Mademoiselle Tomasian’s society 
had its origins in some such source as this. 

She would watch Iskuhi for some time and then burst forth 
more or less as follows : "Ma chere, do you know, as a rule I 
detest Oriental women, their laziness, their languid move- 
ments? I can’t even bear brunettes at home. But you’re not an 
Oriental, Iskuhi. Right now, situng there against the light, 
your eyes look quite blue.” 

“You say that, Madame!” Iskuhi was startled “You, with 
your eyes, and your blond hair? . . .” 

“How often am I to ask you, chine, to tutoyer me and not 
to call me ‘Madame’ ^ Call me ‘Juliette.’ Must you always keep 
rubbing it in that I’m so much older than you?” 

“Oh, no — ^really I wasn’t. . . . Forgive me, please.” Juliette 
had to laugh at so much guilelcssness, which answered a 
coquettish httle joke with startled, almost terrified eyes. 

Iskuhi had had to leave nearly everything in Zeitun and the 
rest along the road. Juliette fitted her out with a whole new 
wardrobe. It was a process she thoroughly enjoyed. At last that 
cabin-trunk packed with garments, the trusty fellow-traveller 
from Paris via Istanbul and Beirut to this wilderness (you 
could never be certain), justified the trouble it had given. 
True that women’s clothes are hke summer leaves and wither 
in the autumn of fashion, no matter how good and expensive 
the silks and materials may have been. Juliette knew nothing 
at all of the present fashions in Pans. She invented a few cf 

176 



her own “by sheer intuition” and began to remodel all her 
apparel for her own as well as Iskuhi’s benefit. This occupa- 
tion, eagerly embraced, pleasantly filled up the afternoons 
after a mormng’s work m house or garden. Juliette had 
really scarcely the chance to come to herself. The modiste’s 
workshop was set up in an empty room. She chose two skilful 
girls from the village as her seamstresses. 

Poor Iskuhi could only sit looking on. But she made an 
admirable fairylike mannequin for the display of Juhette’s 
handiwork. Dull shades suited her especially. She was for 
ever having to try on this or that, let down her hair and put it 
up again, twist and turn round. She did not mind doing it. 
Her zest for life, shaken by the Zeitun experiences, began to 
revive, her cheeks to flush a httle. 

“You really are a fraud, ma petite" Juliette remarked. “One 
might have imagined you’d never worn anything all your 
life but your smock, and perhaps a Turkish veil in front 
of your face. And yet you put on your clothes and move about 
in them as though you could think of nothing but fashions. 
You didn’t come out unscathed from your stay at Lausanne 
and your contact with French culture.” 

One evening Juliette asked her to put on one of her 
"grandes toilettes,” a very low-necked frock without arms. 
Iskuhi flushed. “But it’s impossible. I can’t — ^with my arm. . . .” 

Juliette looked immeasurably concerned. "It’s true. . . . 
But how much longer will all this business last? Two— three 
months. Then we shall all be back in Europe. And I’ll take 
you with me, Iskuhi. I give you my word. In Paris and 
Switzerland there are clinics that will soon put you right.” 

Almost at the same hour in which Gabriel Bagradian’s wife 
was expressing so audacious a hope the remnants of the first 
convoy reached their journey’s end at Deir ez Zor, on the 
edge of Mesopotamian sands. 

Juliette was again full of a theme which had caused her 

177 



husband many bitter hours. Strangely enough, Iskuhi, in- 
Gabriel’s absence, seemed particularly to inspire her to dwell 
on It. It took the form of a series of depreciatory remarks on 
the Armenians, viewed in that brilliant light of Gallic culture, 
which Juliette turned on their obscurity. 

“You may be an ancient paiple,’’ she kept insisting, “c’est 
bien. A civilized people. No doubt. But in what precisely do 
you prove it.? Oh, of course, I’ve been told all the names — 
again and again. Abovian, Raili, Siamanto. But who’s ever 
heard of them? No one in the world except Armenians. No 
European can ever really understand or speak your language. 
You’ve never had a Racine or a Voltaire. And you have no 
Catulle Mendes, no Pierre Loti. Have you read anything of 
Pierre Loti’s, ma petite?" 

Iskuhi, hit by these shafts, looked up intently. “No, Mad — 
No. I’ve never read anything.” 

“Well, they’re all about distant countries.” Juliette seemed 
scornfully to suppose that this in itself was a good enough 
recommendation for Iskuhi. It was not precisely magnanimous 
of Juliette to work with such overwhelming comparisons. But 
she was now in the position of having to defend her own 
against the superior forces of her environment, so it was not 
unnatural. 

From Iskuhi’s eyes it was evident that she might have said 
much. But after a while she answered in one simple sentence: 
“We have some old songs that are very beautiful.” 

“Won’t you sing one of them. Mademoiselle?” begged 
Stephan, who sat watching her from a corner. Iskuhi had 
scarcely known he was there. And now she felt more clearly 
than ever before that the Frenchwoman’s son was a real 
Armenian boy, without any trace of foreigner in him. It may 
have been this perception that made her overcome her re- 
luctance and begin to sing “The Song of Coming and Go- 
ing,” which, less on account of its text t^n its flowing melody, 
had become the working-sorg of the seven villages: 

178 



“Day» of tmsfortune pass ixc gone, 
like the days of winter, come and they go; 

The sorrows oi men do not last very long. 

Like the buyers in shops, they come and go. 

"Persecution and blood lash the people to tears* 

The caravans, they come and they go. 

And men spring up in the garden of earth, 

Whether henbane or balsam, they come and they go. 

"Let the strong not be proud, let the weak not look pale. 
Since life will transpose them; they come and they go. 

The sun pours down fearless, for ever, his light. 

While clouds from the altar, they come and they go. 

“The world is an inn on the road, oh, singer. 

The people, its guests, they come and they go. 

Mother Earth embraces her well-taught child. 

While Ignorant nations may perish, and go.” 

During this song Juliette could feel quite clearly m Iskuhi 
that impenetrable something, presented as shyness, as grief, 
even as the reluctant acceptance of gifts, but which stubbornly 
resisted all her blandishments. Since she had not understood 
all the words, she asked for some of the song to be translated. 
The last verses brought from her a cry of triumph: “Well, 
there you see — how proud you all are I The well-taught child, 
to whom Mother Earth behaves so obligingly, is Armenian. 
And the ignoramuses are all the others. . . .” 

Stephan asked, almost oeremptonly: “Something else, 
Iskuhi.” 

But Juliette insisted on hearing something amorous. Noth- 
ing too solemn. And nothing more about “well-taught chil- 
dren” and “ignorant nations.” “A real love song, Iskuhi.” 

Iskuhi sat very still, bent slightly forward. Her left hand, 
with its crooked fingers, lay in her lap. The deep-hued sun 
behind her filled the window-space, so that her face was 

179 



dark, its features indistinguishable. After a short silence she 
seemed to remember something. “I know one or two love 
songs which they sing round here. One especially. It’s quite 
mad. Really it ought to be sung by a man, though the girl’s 
the chief thing m it.” 

Her little girl’s, or priestess’^ voice seemed to come from a 
void. To this cool voice the wild song was in strangest 
contrast: 


‘‘She came out of her garden 
And held them close against her breasts, 

Two fruits of the pomegranate tree. 

Two great and shimng apples. 

She gave them me, I would not take. 

Hien, with her hand, she struck — 

Struck with her hand upon her breast-bone. 

Struck three times, six times, twelve times — 

Struck till the bone was broke.” 

“Again!” Stephan demanded. But Iskuhi could not be per- 
suaded to repeat, for Gabriel Bagradian was quietly standing 
in the room. 

In those days the Bagradian villa grew more and more ani- 
mated. There were guests at nearly every meal. Juliette and 
Gabriel both of them welcomed this animation. It was becom- 
ing hard for them to be alone together. And guests made the 
time pass more quickly. Every evening meant a fresh vic- 
tory, since It strengthened a hope that with it the perpetual 
shadow had moved its threat a little way farther off. July 
had almost arrived. How much longer could this menace last? 
There were rumours that peace was soon to be signed, and 
peace meant safety. Pastor Aram was now a regular guest. 
Hovsannah, who still had not quite managed to recover, had 
asked him to go and take care of Iskuhi. She, after all, knew 
how accustomed he was to living always with his sister, that 

180 



he becatne restless when he had been a few days withoit. 
having seen her. But there were other frequent guests at 
Gabriel’s table. The main group was composed of Krikor and 
his satellites. The apothecary's tenant, Gonzague Maris, was 
among them. This young Greek was not merely welcome as a 
pianist. He could appreciate beauty and pretty frocks. He 
“noticed things”; Gabriel Bagradian no longer, or very seldom, 
“noticed” them. Juliette’s dress-making hobby, which after all 
was no more than an aimless method of whiling away her 
tune with thoughts of Paris, found its applause in Gonzague 
Mans. He could always, while eschewing vapid flatteries, 
manage to say sometlung delightful, not only about Juliette’s 
appearance, but in skilful praise of the inspirations with which 
she tried to enhance Iskuhi’s charm. Nor did he ever speak as 
a blind enthusiast; it was as an artist, an initiate, that he 
raised the thick eyebrows which slanted at so wide an angle. 
So that Juliette’s workshop, by virtue of Gonzague Mans’s in- 
sight, was lifted out of the region of hobbies on to a plane of 
acknowledged values. His xsthetic sense had also been ap- 
plied to his own appearance Gonzague was doubtless poor 
and a man with a, presumably, chequered past. But he never 
mentioned this. He avoided Juliette’s questions on the subject 
— not because of any special secretiveness, or because he really 
had much to hide, but because he seemed to regard whatever 
had been with a contemptuous shrug, as unimportant. In 
spite of, or because of, his small means, he was extremely well- 
dressed whenever he called at Villa Bagradian. Since it was 
certain to be some time before he got another chance of re- 
plenishing his European wardrobe, he took scrupulous care of 
his clothes. This spick-and-span-ncss of Gonzague affected 
Juliette very pleasantly, without her ever knowing that it was 
so. Its effects on the two schoolteachers, Shatakhian and 
Oskanian, were not so gratifying. Gonzague aroused splenetic 
rivalry in them. The diminutive Hrand Oskanian was in- 
vaded by a reckless jealousy. Neither his poetical calligraphy 

i8i 



oa parcibmcnt nor his so distinguished, portentous silences 
had yet succeeded in winning Madame Bagradian’s attention. 
She ignored his inner worth, his reserve, his dignity. And yet 
this conceited half-breed, by his vain sartorial display, had 
managed instantly to attract her. Oskanian made up his mind 
to take up the unequal struggle in this department. He hur- 
ried off to the village tailor, who, half a generation back, had 
practised in London for two years. 

On the walls of this English maestro’s establishment there 
were fashion-plates of impeccable “lords” of that period. But 
there was not much choice of material — only a few yards of 
thin, grey cloth, hoary with age, scarcely good enough to use 
for hning. That did not deter Oskanian. He chose a lord from 
among the models, one whose male sveltencss was neady 
moulded into a long swallow-tailed morning-coat. The first 
fitting revealed the fact that the swallow-tails reached down 
to litdc Oskanian’s heels. He did not object, though the tailor 
seemed rather doubtful. When the masterpiece was ready to 
wear, Oskanian stuck a white flower in his buttonhole— it 
too in imitation of the “lord.” Unluckily his own inspiration 
was allowed to supply the finishing touch. He hurried to 
Krikor, from whom he bought the strongest scent in the shop> 
a good half-bottle of which he proceeded to sprinkle about his 
person. So he did, at last, for the first five minutes, manag e 
to get himself noticed by Madame Bagradian, and by all her 
guests— the consequence being that Gabriel had to take him 
on one side and tactfully ask him to wear another coat for a 
couple of hours, while the grey chef-d'auvre was being hung 
out to air in the kitchen garden. 

One fine morning in July Gabriel made a suggestion. How 
would It be to spend tomorrow evening and the following 
night on Musa Dagh? To see the sunrise. It seemed a very 
European nouon — the genuine inspiration of a tourist whose 
life is spent between concrete walls, among business letters. 
But here? The guests, all down the table, were perturbed. 

182 



Only Hapeth Shatakhian, anxious not to put his foot in it^ 
appeared to welcome the delights of a night spent in the fresh 
air. But Gabriel Bagradian disillusioned him: “We shan’t 
have to sleep in the hesh air. I’ve found three tents in one of 
the attics here, all of them perfectly fit to use. They belonged 
to my late brother, who took them on his hunting-expeditions. 
Two of them are perfecdy modern hunting-tents, they’re big 
enough to hold two or three people. The third is a very beauti- 
ful Arab pavihon. Either Avetis must have brought it back 
from one of his journeys or else it belonged to our grand- 
father. . . .’’ 

Since Juliette rather welcomed this break in the monotony 
and Stephan was already jumping for joy, the following 
morning, a Saturday, was fixed on for the expedition. Apothe- 
cary Krikor, to whom there was no new thing under the sun, 
since he had already done and experienced everything from 
fruit preserving to comparative theology, began to r eminis ce 
about the days when he had hved and slept in the open. 

Iskuhi seemed uncnthusiastic. No wonder! She had too 
much knowledge of the cruelty of sleeping out of doors— of 
unsheltered earth. Not three hundred miles east of this dining- 
room the dying convoys toiled along the roads. Bagradiah’s 
heartless game annoyed her. She had no inkhng of its purpose. 
“I’d so much rather stay here,” she begged. 

Gabriel turned to her rather sharply. “Impossible, Iskuhi. 
You don’t want to spoil our sport, do you? You must sleep 
in the pavilion with Juliette.” 

Iskuhi stared at the cloth and struggled with words. “I’ve 
. . . I’m afraid . . . You see, every mght, I feel so glad I 
can sleep in a house.” 

Gabrid tried to make her look at him. “I’ve been counting 
especially on you.” 

Iskuhi still did not look up. She bit her lips; Bagradian 
seemed very set on a trifle. *1 really insist on it, Iskuhi.” 

Her face had already begun to twitch, juhette signed to her 

i8=? 



husband to stop worrying Iskuhi. She made him understand 
that later she herself co^d soon persuade the child. But it 
proved harder than she had thought. She attempted womanly 
advice. All men were really children, au fond. Any woman 
who cared to direct life found it best to give them their boyish 
way whenever possible. A real man was never so grateful for 
anything else, and consequently never so easy to manage. If 
one wanted to have one's way in the important things one 
ought never to mind giving way m trifles. These maxims 
sounded as if Juliette were advising herself, the married 
woman. But what, after all, had Iskuhi to do with the httle 
masculine foibles of her host, Gabriel Bagradian? 

She turned away her embarrassed head. “This isn’t a tnfle 
for me.” 

“After all, it may be very jolly. At least it’s new . . 

“I have too many recollections of the novelty.” 

“Your brother, the pastor, doesn’t mind ” 

Iskuhi drew a deep breath “It’s not just my obstinacy,” 

But Juliette seemed to have thought of another way, “If you 
stop here, I won’t go either, I should hate to be the only woman 
among all those men. I’d rather stay here.” 

Iskuhi cast a long glance at Juhettc. “No. Impossible. We 
can’t do that. I’ll come if you want me to. I’ve got over my first 
feeling already. I’d love to do it for you ” 

Juliette looked suddenly fagged out. “Well, we’ve time 
enough till tomorrow morning. We can think it over ten times 
if we like.” 

She clasped her forehead and shut her eyes She felt vaguely 
faint, as though certain of Iskuhi’s memories had at last begun 
to invade her consciousness. 

“Perhaps you're right, Iskuhi, in what you feel. We all live 
such a safe kind of life.” 

Next morning they were up early. Because of the ladies they 
did not choose the short cut up through the ilex gorge, but 

iSa 



the gentle, i£ rather tedious, long way round, over the northern 
saddle. Today, for all its clefts, rocky bastions, wildness, Musa 
Dagh proved a well-disposed mountain, which showed its 
best side to the climber. Iskuhi’s quiet was lost m the gen- 
eral hilarity. But even she seemed, little by httle, to cheer 
up. 

Gabriel Bagradian could observe with what astomshmg 
celerity his son was shedding his European habits ever since 
he had begun going to Shatakhian’s school. “I can scarcely 
recognize him,” Juliette had recently said to Gabriel. “Wc 
shall have to be very careful. He’s already begun to speak that 
dreadful, hard Armenian French, like stones being broken. 
Just hke his wonderful teacher.” By now Stephan knew the 
Damlayik nearly as thoroughly as his father. He played the 
guide but could never manage to stay on the road, since he 
kept looking out for every difficult short cut to climb and 
exercise his gymnastic skill on. Often he was far ahead and 
often well behind the rest, so that his voice could only just be 
heard when they called him. 

They reached the beautiful meadow sooner than Gabriel 
had reckoned. The tents were already set up. There was even 
a flag, waving above the Arab pavilion of the sheikh, or 
Grandfather Avetis. It was embroidered with the arms of 
ancient Armenia — ^Mount Ararat, the Ark, and the dove flut- 
tering in Its centre. 

This pavilion was indeed the resplendent relic of a prouder, 
more magnificent age. It was eight paces long and seven wide. 
Its scaffolding was of poles thick as an arm, of precious woods; 
its interior walls were the finest carpets. It had one great 
disadvantage. It was impregnated with the reek of camphor 
and musty cloth. The walls had been rolled up and sewn into 
sacks, which from time to time the steward Kristaphor had 
buried under mountains of camphor and msect powder. The 
modern tents, brought back from London a few years ago 
by Avetis the younger, aroused far more admiration, though 

185 



they were only made of the usual canvas. But they were 
“replete” with every convemence which the perspicacity of 
an experienced hunter could have desired. Nothing had been 
forgotten in these tents: collapsible field-beds, far from un- 
comfortable, silk sleeping-bags, featherweight tables and chairs 
that fitted into one another, cooking-scts, tea sets, pots and 
plates, all of aluminium. Rubber bathtubs and wash basins. 
Not to mention wind-proof lamps for petroleum and methy- 
lated spirit. 

They began to sort themselves for the night. Juliette re- 
fused the sheikh-pavilion and took up her quarters in a 
modern tent, with Iskuhi. Krikor and Gonzague were given 
the other canvas tent Teacher Oskanian explained, with a som- 
bre glance at Juliette, that he preferred, for reasons of his own, 
to sleep under the open sky — ^apart. As he said it, he threw back 
his woolly head, as if expecting a general chorus of approba- 
tion at so proud and resolute a decision, while at the same 
time a cooing, feminine voice would beseech him to relent 
and change his tmnd. But Juliette did not so much as mention 
the wild beasts and deserters to which he exposed himself for 
her sake. 

Bagradian secretly thought of this night out of doors as a 
dress rehearsal. But it passed without any incident — ^like hun- 
dreds of picnics of the same kind. Nothing romantic — unless 
indeed it were the fact that the cook Hovhannes prepared 
supper over an open fire. The daring house-boy Missak had 
ventured a few days back to go to Antioch, where a well- 
disposed army contractor had sold him a whole mule-load of 
English tinned foods, which they sampled that night. Sato 
had followed the party at a distance. She lurked in the dusk 
beyond the fire, and during the meal Stephan jumped up from 
time to time to take her some of his own food. They sat round 
the fire on rugs, like all picnickers. Missak had spread out a 
tablecloth on a fiat knoll for the dishes. The evenmg was 
pleasandy cool. The moon was near :ts first quarter. The fire 

i86 



began to burn more faintly. They drank wme, and the strong 
mulberry brandy distilled by the peasants of the district. 
Juliette soon broke up the party. She had a queer feeling of 
disquiet. Now at last she could understand Iskuhi’s reluctance. 
All round her glowered the savage, unpeopled earth — so hor- 
ribly in earnest. This was perhaps a rather malicious game 
that Gabriel played at. The others also said good-night. Oskan- 
lan strode off, with head erect, to pay for his vanity with a 
chilly night, as near the encampment as possible. Gabriel 
posted sentries. Two men together for three hours were to keep 
guard around the tents. Gabriel gave out rifles and ball- 
cartridges. Kristaphor and Missak had gone on hunting- 
expeditions with Avetis and were quite used to handling fire- 
arms. At last Gabriel lay down. Neither he nor Iskuhi could 
sleep. 

The girl lay taut, not moving a limb, anxious not to wake 
Juliette. But Gabriel twisted and turned for hours. The reek 
of camphor and mildew stifled him. At last he dressed again 
and came outside. It was about fifteen minutes to twelve. He 
sent the sentries, Missak and the cook, to bed. Then he paced 
slowly up and down, sole guardian of the “Three-Tent 
Square.” Often he switched on his pocket-torch, but it only 
lit up a tiny circle. Bats flapped through the dark. As the moon 
rode seawards out of a cloud, a nightingale began singing in 
the deathly quiet with such bubbhng energy that Gabriel was 
stirred. He tried to find out how it had happened that his 
deepest thought was already taking so clear a shape. There 
they were externahzed — ^three tents against the dark sky. How 
had it come about'’ Thinking was impossible now. His soul 
was too full. As Gabriel lit a fresh cigarette, he saw a ghost 
standing not far off. This phantom wore the lambskin cap 
of a Turkish private, and was leaning on an infantry rifle. 
Its face was invisible — probably a very hollow-cheeked face, 
against which its cigarette had begun to glow. Gabriel hailed 
the ghost. It did not more, even at his second and third call. 

187 



He drew his army revolver and snapped the catch with a 
loud click. It was sheer formality, since he felt quite certain 
that the man had no intention of molesting him. It hesitated a 
while before it moved, and then a queer, long-drawn, in- 
different laugh came rattling out of it. The cigaretteend 
vanished, the ghost with it. Gabriel shook Kristaphor awake. 
“There arc one or two people hanging round. Deserters, I 
think.” 

The steward did not seem in the least surprised. “Oh, yes, 
there’ll be some deserters. The poor lads must be having a bad 
time.” 

“I saw only one.” 

“That may have been Sarkis Kihkian.” 

“Who’s Sarkis Kilikian?” 

“Asdvaz iml Merciful God I” Kristaphor in a vague, help- 
less gesture indicated that really it was impossible to say 
exactly who Sarkis Kilikian was. But Bagradian ordered out 
his men, by now all awake; “Go out and find this Kihkian. 
Take him something to eat. The chap looked hungry.” 

Kristaphor and Missak set out, with tins of food and a 
lantern, but came back in the end without havmg found him. 
Apparently they had ended by fcchng scared. 

The evening had been anxious, the mormng was decepuve. 
The world looked vaporous. They all felt restless. Sunrise 
was quite invisible. All the same they climbed one of the 
treeless knolls, from which they could scan the sea and sur- 
rounding coimtry emerging gradually through the haze. 

Bagradian turned. “One could manage to hold out here for 
a few weeks.” He said it as though in defence of the maligned 
beauties of Musa Dagh. 

Gonzague Mans seemed to have passed a better mght than 
anyone else, he looked so fresh and full of life. He pointed out 
the big spirit factory near Suedia, its chimneys just starting to 
belch forth smoke. This factory, so he told them, was owned 

i88 



by a foreign company. Its manager was a trreek, whom he 
had got to know in Alexandretta. He had seen him only the 
other day and heard some rather interesting rumours. First, a 
combined peace effort by the American president and the 
Pope was well under way. The second concerned the Arme- 
nian transportations. These were only intended to affect the 
Armenian vilayets, not Syria. He, Gonzague, could not tell 
how much all that was to be relied on, but this factory-owner 
was considered a most reliable sort of man and had private 
interviews every month with the Wall of Aleppo on army 
supplies. Gabriel was filled for a few seconds with the con- 
vicuon that all danger was past, and what had seemed so 
near was already retreating into the distance. It felt as if he 
himself had beaten back fate. 

He burst forth, in gratitude: “Just look! Isn’t it lovely here?” 

Juliette was impatient to get back home. She hated being 
seen in the early morning, by men especially. In the morning, 
she insisted, only ugly women look their best, and no ladies 
exist at 6 a.m. Besides, she wanted at least half an hour’s rest 
before mass. When she had got engaged to Gabriel, she had 
obliged him by ceasing to be a Roman Catholic and entering 
the Armenian Orthodox Church. This had been one of the 
many sacrifices which she never forgot to mention when they 
quarrelled. She picked holes, as her habit was. The Armenian 
rite was not nearly ornate enough to please her. But what 
shocked Juliette most was that Armenian priests should all 
wear beards, and usually long ones. She could not abide a 
bearded man. Their way back was down the shorter path, 
which led through the ilex grove to Yoghonoluk. Krikor, Ga- 
briel, and Shatakhian went ahead. Avakian stayed. He took 
this chance of making a few improvements on his maps. 
Bagradian had given orders not to strike the tents for the time 
being. Some of the stable-boys were to stay up on the Dam- 
layik to guard them. Perhaps they would soon be having an- 
other picnic. One reason for this was Gabriel’s superstitious 

189 



fancy that such preparedness might help to break the power of 
fate. The wretched donkey-track lost itself here and there in 
shrubs and undergrowth. Juliette in thin shoes, and with pam- 
pered feet, kept voicing her horror of such impediments. Then 
Gonzague would assist her, with a resolute gri^. They had 
begun a vague and often interrupted conversauon: 

“I can never stop lemembering, Madame, that we’re the 
only two foreigners here.” 

Juliette anxiously tested the earth she trod. “You at least 
are a Greek. . . . That’s not quite so foreign.” 

Gonzague let her surmount her difficulties unaided. “What? 
... I was brought up in America. . . . But you’ve been a 
long time married to an Armenian." 

“Yes. I’ve got some reason for living here. . . . But you?” 

“Usually I find my reasons afterwards.” 

A steep place had set them running. Juliette paused to get 
her breath. “I’ve never really understood what you want here. 

. . .You aren’t very frank about it, you know. . . . What 
can an American who’s not trading in lambskins or cotton 
or gallnuts find to do in Alexandretta?" . . . 

“Though I may not be frank — careful just here, please — 
I’m perfectly willing to tell you that. ... I was engaged as 
accompanist by a touring vaudeville troupe . . . not much of 
a job . . . even though my host Knkor seems to think so 
highly of It. . . .” 

“I see. ... So you left all your actress friends in the lurch. 

. . . And where’s the vaudeville troupe now, then?” 

“It had contracts for Aleppo, Damascus, Beirut. . . .” 

“And you simply left them?” 

“Quite right. ... I just ran away. . . . It’s one of my 
foibles.” 

“Ran away? ... A young man like you? . . . Well, you 
must have had some good reason. . . .” 

“I’m not so very young as you seem to think.” 

"Mon Dicu, this road I . . . My shoe’s full of stones. 

190 


• • • 



Please give me your hand. . . . Thanks.” With her left hand 
she kept a firm hold on Gonzaguc. With her right she shook 
out the shoe. 

He, however, stuck to his question: “How old do you think 
I am^ . . . Guess." 

“I’m really not m the mood for guessing just now.” 

Gonzague, serious, as if conscience-stricken: “Thirty-two." 

Juliette, with a short laugh: “For a man! . . .” 

“I’m sure I’ve seen more of the world than you, Madame. 
When one gets pushed about as I have, one comes to see the 
truth. . . .” 

“Heaven only knows where all the others are. . . . Hullo 
. . . I do think they might answer us.” 

“We’re getting on all right. . . 

Juliette stopped again, as the road became steep and full 
of shrubs. 

“I’m not used to climbing about like this — my legs ache. 
Let’s stop a minute.” 

“There’s nothing here for us to sit on.” 

“I tell you, Gonzague, you’d far better get away from 
Yoghonoluk. . . . What can they do to you.? You’re an 
American citizen. . . . And you don’t look the least bit 
Armenian. . . .” 

“But? French?” 

“Oh, you needn’t go and imagine that’” 

The little stream that flowed through the ilex gorge lay 
across their path. Not so much as a tree-trunk to cross by. 
Gonzague lifted Juliette over, big as she was, with an easy 
swing. His narrow shoulders had not looked as though he 
could do It. She felt his cool fingers around her hips, but they 
did not stir her. The path was becoming less steep, and they 
quickened their pace. 

Gonzague broached the essential question: “And Gabriel 
Bagradian? What makes him stay on? Hasn’t he any chance 
to get out of Turkey?” 


191 



“In war-time? . . . Where'’ . . . We’re Turkish subjects. 
. . . Gabriel is liable for service. . . . They’ve taken our pass- 
ports. . . . Who can make out these savages? . . 

“But, really, Juliette, you look sufficiently French. . . . No, 
really, you look more like an Englishwoman.” 

“French? English? . . . Why, what do you mean?” 

“Well, with a little courage you — I mean you especially — 
could get anywhere.” 

“I’m a wife and mother.” 

Juliette was walking so fast that Gonzague had to keep a 
little behind her. She seemed to feel the breath of his words: 
“Life is life.” 

She turned abruptly. “If that’s your way of looking at it, 
why do you stop in Asia?” 

“I ? It’s war-time now for all the men in the world.” 

Juliette’s haste increased again. “It’s easy for you, Gonzague. 
If only we had your American passport ... You could easily 
follow your troupe to Damascus or Beirut. Why waste your 
time in this God-forsaken hole?” 

“Why?” By now Gonzague could keep close up behind 
Juliette. 

“Why? If I really knew that, perhaps you’d be the last 
person I could say it to, Juhettc.” 

Truly the .spirit had guided Gabriel to stage his eleventh- 
hour “dress rehearsal ” In the hall of the villa the pock-marked 
All Nassif awaited him. “Please, Sir, I’ve come for those 
medjidjehs you promised me when you gave me something 
on account.” 

Gabriel drew forth a Turkish pound and with a steady hand 
gave It to All, as though, now, all were in order, and he could 
hear what he had paid for without impatience. 

The old saptieh took the money cautiously. “I’m going clean 
against my orders. But you won’t give me away, Effendi?” 

“You’ve taken your money. Say what you have to say.” 

IQ2 



AH Nassif blinked around dubiously. “In three days the 
mudir and the police chief will come to the villages.” 

Bagradian leaned his stick in a corner and freed himself 
from the field-glass slung over his shoulders. “I see. And 
what good news will the mudir and police chief have to brmg 
us?” 

The pohceman rubbed his stubbled chin. “You’ll be having 
to leave here, Effendi. The Wah and the Kaimakam have 
commanded it. The saptiehs arc to collect you and your peo- 
ple from Suedia and Antakiya and lead you eastwards. But 
I can tell you you won’t be allowed to halt in Aleppo. That’s 
because of the consuls.” 

“And you — will you be one of the saptiehs, Ah Nassif?” 

The pock-marked Ah protested noisily: “Inshallahl I thank 
God I Nol Haven’t I been living twelve years among you? 
As commandant of the whole district ? And there’s never once 
been any trouble. Yes, I’ve kept order day and night. And 
now, because of you. I’m losing my good job. Oh, ingratitudel 
Our post is being disbanded altogether.” 

And Bagradian, to comfort the poor fellow, pressed a few 
cigarettes into his hand. “Now tell me. Ah Nassif, when is 
your post to be disbanded?” 

“I have orders to march to Antakiya this very day. The 
mudir will come here with a whole company.” 

Meanwhile Juliette, Iskuhi, and Stephan had reached the 
house. The sight of AH Nassif aroused no suspicion in them. 
Gabriel shepherded the saptieh out of the hallway and into 
the gravelled square in front of the house. “According to 
what you’ve been saying. Ah Nassif, the viUages will be left 
without police supervision for three days.” 

Gabriel seemed to consider that suspicious. The saptieh 
anxiously lowered his voice. “Oh, Effendi, if you give me away, 
I shall be put to death, and worse. I shaU have a scroll pinned 
on my chest with the inscripuon, ‘Traitor.’ . . . All the same 
I’U t^ you everything. For three whole days there won’t be 

193 



a single saptieh in the villages, because the post is being re- 
conditioned in Antakiya. And then you’ll all be given a few 
days to pack up in. . . 

Gabriel glanced at the windows of the house, as though 
fearful that Juliette might be looking out of them. ‘Have you 
had to send in lists of inhabitants. All Nassif?” 

The pock-marked face blinked with sly fidelity at Gabriel: 
“Hope nothing for yourself, Effendi. They’re going to be 
particularly hard on the rich and learned. They say: ‘What 
use is It to us that poor, hard-working Armenians should die 
off, if the effendis, the money-bags and lawyers, stay on in 
our country.^ There’s a special bad mark against your name. 
You’ve been reported at headquarters, Effendi. They’ve talked 
of you again and again. And don’t go and imagine they’ll 
spare your family. You’re to be taken together as far as 
Antakiya, but after that they mean to separate you.” 

Bagradian eyed the poheeman almost joyously. “You seem to 
be one of the great and initiated. Has the mudir opened his 
heart to you, Ali Nassif?” 

Ali nodded solemnly. “Only for your sake, Sir, did I labour 
so. I stood in the offices of the Hukumet and, remembering 
you, I strained my ears. Oh, Effendi, in spite of your miserable 
paper pound, I have earned a great reward in the hereafter. 
What is a paper pound worth today ^ Even if they will change 
it in the bazaar for you, they cheat you. And see, my suc- 
cessors will have more than a hundred gold pounds, and all 
the medjidjehs they find in the villages. Your house will be 
theirs alone, with all that is in it. You can take nothing with 
you. And your horses also will be theirs. And your garden, 
and all its fruits. . . .” 

Bagradian stopped this flowery enumeration: “May they 
have joy of it.” 

He drew himself up. But Ali Nassif would not stir from 
his disconsolate place. “Now I have sold you ali this for a 
scrap of paper.” 



And so, to get rid of him, Bagradian emptied all the piastres 
out of his pockets. 

When Gabriel entered the presbytery, he saw to his great sur- 
prise that Ter Haigasun must have known of the catastrophe 
several hours before Ah Nassif brought him the news. Thomas 
Kebussyan was with him, together with the six other mukh- 
tars, two married village priests, and Pastor Nokhudian from 
Bitias. Grey and waxen faces. This thunderbolt had not cleared 
away that cloud of morbid coma m which for weeks these 
people had been creeping about their business; it had only 
thickened it. They stood leaning against the walls, seeming to 
grow against them like plants. Only Ter Haigasun was seated. 
His face was bent back, almost m shadow, but his hands, rest- 
ing quietly before him on the desk, flamed white, in a rigid 
shaft of sunlight. When anyone spoke, it was in a scarcely 
audible whisper, not moving his lips. Even Ter Haigasun 
only whispered, as now he turned to greet Bagradian: 

“I’ve told these mukhtars to call their people together, the 
instant they get back to their villages. This very day, and as 
soon as possible, all the grown-ups, from Wakef to Kebussiye, 
must come together here in Yoghonoluk. We shall hold a big 
meeting to decide what’s best to be done.” 

Pastor Nokhudian’s tremulous voice came out of a corner: 
“There’s nothing to be done. . . .” 

The mukhtar of Bitias came a few steps out into the room. 

“Whether it’s any use or not, the people must come to- 
gether to hear speeches and speak themselves. It’ll make it 
easier.” 

Ter Haigasun let these interruptions pass as he sat there 
frowning. He went on to tell Gabriel of his decisions: “In 
this general assembly the peoples are to choose delegates whom 
they trust and who will take over the leadership. Disciphne 
is the only weapon left us. If we keep law and order, even out 
there, perhaps we shan’t die.” 


*95 



As he said “out there,” Ter Haigasun opened his half-shut 
eyes to glance searchingly at Gabriel. 

Thomas Kebussyan wagged his bald head. “We can’t hold a 
meeting in the church square. Nor in the church. There arc 
the saptiehs. . . . And others, too. God knows who wouldn’t 
creep in and listen, and then betray us. And besides the church 
is too small for all of us. So where?” 

“Where? That’s very simple.” Bagradian spoke for the first 
time. “My garden has a high wall all round it. The wall has 
three doors which you can bolt. There’s enough room for 
ten thousand people. It’s as good as a strong fortress.” 

This suggestion of Gabriel’s decided it. Those who, from 
despair or will-less passivity, longed to let themselves be 
destroyed without any irksome show of resistance — and those 
who made heavy weather of everything — could raise no objec- 
tions. And what serious objection could they have had against 
the proposal that folk of this Armeman valley should get 
together, in this death-agony of their race, and choose leaders 
— even leaders as helpless as they? This place of assembly was 
secure, they need fear no intensification of punishment. Per- 
haps what contributed to this feeling was the superstition 
that Bagradian had powerful connexions, which he might use 
in behalf of the seven villages. With dead movements and 
dragging steps, the mukhtars left to assemble their communes. 
Since Yoghonoluk was the central village, the last stragglers 
would be in Bagradian’s garden by four that afternoon. The 
mukhtars themselves were to undertake to guard the entrances, 
so that no outsider should be let m. Ter Haigasun stood up. 
The bells were already ringing. He would have to get ready 
to vest for mass. 

Of all the masses used by Christian sects the Armenian 
takes longest. The time from the Introit to the priest’s last 
agn of the cross may easily be an hour and a half. No instru- 
ments, only tinkling bells and cymbals, accompany the choirs, 
which, on any impatient Sunday, increase their tempo to 

196 



hurry the priest. But today the choirs were not successful 
Ter Haigasun took longer than ever before over each sacred 
paragraph and act. Was he striving to hitch his prayer to 
the miracle of some incomprehensible rescue? Did he want to 
put oif as long as possible the mstant at which this flash of 
lightmng would strike down on his unwitting flock? All too 
soon came the last blessing and the words: “Go in peace, 
and the Lord be with you.” The benches began to rusde with 
departure. But Ter Haigasun came down to the edge of the 
chancel steps, spread his arms, and called: 

“What we have all been fcarmg has happened.” 

Then, in a quiet voice, in a few words, he explained. No- 
body must get unnecessarily excited, or let himself be carried 
away. The deathly silence of this instant must remain un- 
broken through the next days. No confusion, no losing of 
heads, no weeping or wailing, was of any use. It would only 
make thmgs worse than they were already. Unity, resolution, 
disciphne. They were the only means of avoiding the worst. 
There was still time to think out every step. Ter Haigasun in- 
vited the communes to the great assembly in Bagradian’s 
garden. No healthy adult of sound mind, man or woman, 
should stay away. 

In this assembly it would be for the seven communes not 
only to decide collectively what line it was best to take, but 
to elect leaders to represent the people before the authorities 
no matter what happened. This time the usual show of hands 
at parish elections would not be enough. So let everyone 
brmg pencil and paper to record his vote in proper form. 

“But now go quietly home,” the priest implored them. “No 
standing about. Don’t make disturbances. Perhaps they’ve 
sent spies to watch you. The saptiehs mustn’t notice that you’re 
warned. Don’t forget to bring voting papers. Quiet, above all.” 

He need not have given his second warmng. Like dead 
people, or people already touched by death, they silendy groped 
their way out into the daylight as if they had never known it 

197 



No man knows himself until he is tested. Gabriel’s biography 
till that day: The son of a well-to-do family; brought up in 
comfortable surroundmgs; his hfc that of a leisured “intel- 
lectual” spent here and there in Europe, in Paris. Long since 
absolved from any ties which bind a man to his family, to the 
State, from any sense of commumty with the masses; a 
sheltered, an abstract human being. Very few angles to bark 
bis shins on. An elder brother — an invisible, imperceptible 
benefactor — ^who, as head of the house, provided for every 
need. Then, strangely enough, the first interruption of this 
thoughtful, sensitive, introverted life — ^the episode of the mili- 
tary training-school and war. That patriotic idealism with 
which the contemplative suddenly found himself imbued is 
not so easy to account for. The general poliucal fraternization 
of Turkish and Armenian youth could not be a sufficient 
explanation. Perhaps something more was involved then: 
some secret rcsdcssncss, the attempt to get away from his 
own, all too well-ordered, easy-going life. And during that 
short campaign Gabriel Bagradian had discovered unsus- 
pected capacities in himself. He was not only, as till then he 
had supposed, a man whose eyes were exclusively set on in- 
visible worlds. He showed himself surprisingly equal to de- 
mands made on his powers of action, presence of mind, fore- 
sight, courage, and to a far higher degree than most of his 
Oriental comrades. He was promoted quickly, several times 
mentioned in dispatches, praised in commanders’ reports. True 
that in the days which followed all that had seemed a thing of 
the past, an dmost illogical memory, since his earlier nature 
resumed its sway, more mature, far more balanced than pre- 
viously. But today — ^it was the twenty-fourth of July — ^made all 
the years of his hfe seem a pale preliminary. 

Samuel Avakian was amazed when he saw how the artificial 
foibles of weeks, the hobbies of a bored idler, dovetailed to- 
gether into one stardingly vivid plan of defensive action. They 

198 



sat in Bagradian’s study behind locked doors, which were 
opened to no one. The mysterious strokes, crosses, dotted lines, 
on the three maps, at which the student had smiled as at a 
dreamy testing of his patience revealed themselves now as a 
unified, precisely thought-out system. The thick blue line 
along the northern saddle meant a long trench set back against 
the stone barricades (indicated in brown) of the rocky side. 
The thinner blue line behind denoted a reserve trench; the 
little squares to the sides of these trenchest, flank-protection or 
outposts. Those figures, too, from two to eleven, which filled 
up the side of the Damlayik facing the valley, ceased to be 
meaningless numbers and became well-thought-out sectors of 
the defence. So, too, did various inscriptions take on a mean- 
ing: “Town Enclosure,” “Dish Terrace,” “Headquarters 
Peak,” “Observers I, II, III,” “South Bastion.” The last was 
the best inspiration of the whole scheme. A garrison of two 
dozen men posted here ought to be enough to hold off any 
number of assailants. Even women might be able to hold it. 

Gabriel’s face was aglow with eagerness. It had never looked 
so like the young face of his son Stephan. “I’m starting to 
feel very hopeful.” He measured out a distance with Stephan’s 
compasses. “I know what Turkish soldiers are like. And all 
their best troops are at the front. The sort of territorial off- 
scourings they’ll have mustered up from Antioch, with 
saptiehs and the irregulars in the barracks, are only good for 
a httle safe looting.” 

Suddenly confronted with this strange new military work, 
Samuel Avakian’s high, recedmg forehead took on a dull 
white look in contrast to the oalour in Gabriel’s cheeks. “But 
at best we can only count on a thousand men. I don’t know 
how many rifles and munitions they’ve got. And there are 
regulars in every Turkish town — ^not only in Antakiya, but 
everywhere. . . .” 

“We have a population of about five thousand five hundred,” 

199 



interrupted Bagradian. “We need expect no mercy, only slow 
death. But Musa Dagh isn’t so easy to surround.” 

Avakian stared goggle-eyed through the window. “But will 
these five thousand all want the same thing as you do, 
Effendi?” 

“If they don’t, they all deserve to perish together in Mesopo- 
tamian dust. . . . But I don’t want to hve. I don’t want to be 
rescued. I want to fight! ... I want to kill as many Turks as 
we have cartridges. And, if necessary. I’ll stay on alone on the 
Damlayik. With the deserters!” 

It was not preasely hate. It was a kind of sacred, and at the 
same time exultant, wrath that glittered in Bagradian’s eyes. 
It was as though he rejoiced at the thought of standing out 
single-handed against Enver Pasha’s army, a million strong. 
It lifted him out of his seat and urged him up and down the 
room, like a madman. “I don’t want to live, I want to have 
some value!” 

The crumpled Avakian still refused to be talked round. 
“Very good. We can defend ourselves for a time. And 
then . . . ?” 

Gabriel halted his excited pacing and quietly sat down to 
his work again. “Anyway, within the next twenty-four hours 
we’ve got to solve all sorts of problems. Which would be the 
best place for the stockyard, the munition dump, the hospital? 
And what kind of shelters can we raise? There are enough 
springs, but what will be the best way to economize water? 
Here are some rough notes in which I sketched out the routine 
for the armed troops. Make a fair copy, will you, Avakian? 
We shall need them. In fact, get all these notes here into 
shape. I don’t think there’s much I haven’t thought of. For 
the present it’s all still theoretical, but I’m convinced that 
most of It can be worked out. We Armenians arc always 
priding ourselves on superior brains. That’s one of the things 
that’s riled them so. Now it’s fpr us to prove that we really 
are so much cleverer.” 


300 



Avakian felt profoundly disturbed. More even than by this 
general catastrophe was he confused by irresistible waves of 
strength which now seemed to emanate from Gabriel. There 
was about him not a shining atmosphere so much as a hot, 
glowing one. The less he spoke, the more quietly he worked, 
the more overpov/ering it became. Avakian felt this influence 
so strong on him chat he could not concentrate his thoughts, 
could find no more words to express his doubts, had to keep 
on staring at Gabriel’s face, deeply engrossed over war maps. 
In this silent paralysis he even failed to hear Bagradian’s next 
order, and had to have it impatiently repeated: 

“Go downstairs now, Avakian. Say I shan’t be coming in to 
lunch. Ask them to send Missak up with something. I can’t 
waste a second. And — I’ll see no one before the meeting. You 
understand? Not even my wife.” 

By one o’clock the people had begun to arrive. The mukhtars, 
according to arrangements, personally supervised the doors of 
the park wall, to test the credentials of every member of the 
assembly. This precautionary measure proved superfluous, 
since All Nassif and his gendarmes had already set out for 
Antakiya without having cared to say good-bye to acquaint- 
ances of many years’ standing. Nor had cither the Turkish 
postman’s family or any of the Moslem inhabitants of nearby 
villages secretly joined the throngs on the roads to Yoghono- 
luk. Long before the time given out, the last groups had been 
filtered through the sieve. Then the main entrance gates were 
closed, and finally the garden doors. The people massed on 
the wide empty space in front of the house. About three thou- 
sand men and women. There was a big stable-yard just be- 
yond the left wing, but at Ter Haigasun’s request this was 
roped off with clothes lines and kept free of people. The no- 
tables had assembled on the raised terrace before the house. 
The few steps leading up to it formed an excellent tribune for 
speech-making. The village clerk of Yoghonoluk had placed 

201 



his little scrivening-table at the foot of these steps, to take 
down any important resolutions. 

Gabriel Bagradian stayed as long as possible in his room, the 
windows of which were turned away from the crowd. He was 
anxious not to fritter away the plenitude of emouon which 
possessed him in haphazard talks. He came out of the house 
only when Ter Haigasun sent for him. Sallow, despondent 
faces stared up at his, not three thousand, but one face only. 
It was the helpless face of exile, here as in hundreds of other 
places at this hour. The mass, without needing to do so, stood 
there so painfully jammed together that it looked far smaller 
than It was. Some way beyond it, where ancient trees bounded 
the open space, there lay or squatted a few stragglers, cut off 
from the rest as though their lives had ceased to matter. 

As Gabriel scanned this people, his own people, a sudden 
horror began to invade him. His scared heart missed a beat. 
Once again reality looked quite different from any concept 
which he had formed of it. These people here were not the 
tame as those he had seen day by day in the villages, the ob- 
ject of all his daring calculation. A deathly severity and bitter- 
ness stared at him from wide-open eyes. Such massed faces 
looked like shrivelled fruits Even the cheeks of the young 
were drawn and wrinkled-looking. He had sat in these peas- 
ants’ workshops and parlours but had seen as little of the truth 
as a traveller driving through a village. For the first time now, 
in this instant of overwhelming attention, was a deep contact 
re-established between this uprooted “European” and his own. 
All he had thought and worked out in his room was losing 
validity — so alien, so uncanny, the sight of these whom he 
wanted to impel his way. Women still in their Sunday clothes, 
with silk head-scarves, strings of coins round their necks, and 
clattering bracelets on their wrists. Many were wearing Turk- 
ish dress. Their legs were in wide trousers, and they had drawn 
the feredjeh round their foreheads, although they were devout 
Christians. Proximity made such assimilations inevitable, espe* 

202 



dally in the border villages such as Wakef and Kebussiye. 
Gabriel stared at the men in their dark entaris, on their bearded 
heads fezes or fur caps. It was hot, and some had pulled their 
shirts open. The flesh under their tanned and crowsfooted 
faces looked strangely white. The white, prophetic heads of 
blind beggars, here and there m the mass, stood out hke 
searching assessments of guilt at a Last Judgment. In the very 
front stood Kevork, the sunflower-dancer. Even this half-wit 
no longer wore an expression of slobbering eagerness to be 
useful, but of reproach, which included this and the other 
world. Gabriel passed an ice-cold hand down the English 
tweed of his jacket It felt as though he were stroking nettles. 
And the question rose in his mind: “Why me, of all people? 
How shall I speak to them?” The responsibility he was shoul- 
dering chilled him, like a sudden eclipse — a shadow of bats' 
wings. The shameful thought: “Get clear of all this. At once, 
today. . . . No matter where. . . Ter Haigasun had begun 
slowly hammering his first words into the crowd. They 
sounded clearer and clearer m Gabriel’s ear. Words and sen- 
tences took a meaning. The echpse had passed across his sky. 

Ter Haigasun stood motionless on the top step. Only his 
lips and the cross on his breast moved very slightly as he was 
speaking. The pointed hood shadowed his waxen face; his 
black beard, with its streaks of grey, stood out from deeply 
furrowed cheeks. His eyes, which he kept half shut, formed 
mysterious shadows. It looked not as though he were experi- 
enang at that moment the first stirrings of infimte thoughts, 
but as though he had already lived through them, had weighed 
and pondered, and now, arrived at his conclusion, was at last 
able to seek repose. Although, hke all Eastern languages, Ar- 
menian lends itself to tropes and images, he spoke in curt, 
almost and sentences. 

They must see exactly what the government meant to do. 
There could scarcely be any among the elder people present 
who had not had a taste of the earlier massacres, if not in their 

203 



own persons, then at least through the deaths and sufkrii^ 
of their kindred over in Anatoha. Christ had watched over 
Musa Dagh with undeserved mercy. For many long and 
blessed years the villages had been 1^ in peace while Arme- 
nians in Adana and other places were being killed ofi in their 
tens of thousands. But they must clearly distinguish between 
massacre and exile. The first lasted four or five days, perhaps 
a week. A brave man had almost always the chance to sell his 
life dearly. It was easy to find a place in which women and 
children could hide. The blood-lust of excited soldiers soon 
died down again. Even the most bestial saptieh sickened at 
the thought, once it was over. Though the government had 
always arranged such massacres, it had never admitted having 
done so. They were born of disorder, and vanished in disorder 
again. But disorder had been the best part of such rascally 
business, and the worst to fear from it had been death. Banish- 
ment was a very different story. Anyone might think himself 
lucky who was released from it by death, even the cruellest 
Banishment did not pass, like an earthquake, which always 
spares a certain number of people and houses. Banishment 
would go on till the last Armenian had either been slaught- 
ered, died of hunger on the roads, of thirst in the desert, or 
been carried off by spotted typhus or cholera. This time it 
was not a case of unbridled, haphazard methods, of whipped- 
up blood-lust, but of something far more terrible — an ordered 
attack. It was all to go according to a plan worked out in the 
government offices of Istanbul. He, Ter Haigasun, had known 
of such a plan for months, even long before the misfortune 
of Zeitun. He also knew that not all the efforts of the Cath- 
oiicos, of patriarchs and bishops, all the threats of ambassadors 
and consuls, had availed. The only thing that he, a village 
priest, had been able to do had been to keep silence, no matter 
how hard it had seemed to do so, so that the last happy days 
of his poor flock might not be destroyed. That time was over 
at last. Now they must look thmgs squarely in the face. No- 

204 



body, in these discussions, need make the futile suggestion of 
sending petitions and delegations to the authorities. All that 
would be a waste of time. “Human compassion is at an end. 
Christ crucified demands of us that we follow Him in his 
passion. There is nothing left us but to die. . . 

Here Ter Haigasun paused for a scarcely perceptible instant, 
before concluding; on a new note: “The one question is — 
how?” 

“How?” shouted Pastor Aram Tomasian, and pushed his 
way quickly out beside the priest. “I know how I mean to die 
— not like a defenceless sheep, not on the road to Dcir ez-Zor, 
not in the filth of a concentration camp, not of hunger, and 
not of the stinking plague — ^nol 1 mean to die on the threshold 
of my own house, with a gun in my hand. Christ will help me 
to It, Whose word I preach. And my wife shall die with me, 
and the unborn child in her womb. . . .” 

This outburst had almost broken Aram’s chest. He pressed 
his hands on his midriff, to get his breath again. Then, more 
quietly, he began to tell them what life had been in the con* 
voy, what he himself had had to suffer, though only in the 
mildest form, for a very short time. 

“No one can possibly know what it’s like, beforehand. One 
only begins to realize at the last minute, as the officer gives 
the order to move off, as the church and houses, when you 
look back on them, get smaller and smaller, till they van- 
ish. . . 

Aram described the eternal route, from stage to stag^ with 
one’s feet getting worse every day, one’s body swelling — ^with 
fainting people left to die on the roads, with people who 
dragged themselves along^ till gradually they got to be hke 
beasts, with people who perished one by one, under daily 
thrashings from the saptiehs. His words themselves descended 
on the crowd like cudgel-blows. . . . Yet, strangely, not a cry 
had risen from the agonized aouls these thousands^ not one 
wild outburst. They stood, «rill staring up at the nnall group 

205 



of people round the house door, as they might have at a group 
of tragic actors playing what did not directly concern them. 
These vine- and fruit-growers, wood-carvers, comb-makers, 
bee-keepers, silkworm-breeders, who had felt so long that this 
would happen, could not grasp it with their minds, now it 
was here. The haggard faces still looked puzzled and concen- 
trated. The life-force in them was still struggling to pierce the 
sick chrysalis stage of the last few weeks. 

Aram Tomasian shouted: “Blessed are the dead, for with 
them it is all over.” 

Here, for the first time, an indescribable moan passed 
through the listeners. It was not an outcry, but a long, sighing, 
groaning breath, a huge, swellmg sigh, as though not human 
beings were sighing, but the suffering earth itself. 

Aram’s voice sharply capped this threnody: “We, too, want 
to get death over as fast as possible. Therefore we must defend 
our homes, so that all of us, men, women, children, may find 
a quick death.” 

“Why death?” 

This had come from Gabriel Bagradian. A light, somewhere 
deep down in his consciousness, seemed to ask him, even as 
he heard himself; “Is that P” His heart beat quiedy. The 
strained vacillation was past and gone — for ever. Great cer- 
tainty possessed him. All the muscles of his body were re- 
laxed. He knew with his whole being: “For this one second it’s 
worth while to have lived.” Always, when talking to these 
villagers, his Armenian had seemed laboured and embarrassed. 
But now It was not he who spoke to them — ^and this knowl- 
edge brought him complete peace— it was the force which 
had brought him here, down the long, winding road of cen- 
turies, the short, twisted path of his own life. He listened in 
amazement to this power, as it found the words in him so 
naturally. 

“My brothers and sisters, I haven’t lived among you. . . . 
That’s true. ... I was a stranger to my home and no longer 

ao6 



knew you. . . . And then ... no doubt because of this, God 
sent me back from the big cities of the West to this old villa, 
which was my grandfather’s. . . . And so now I’m no longer 
the guest, almost the stranger, I was among you, for my fate 
will be exactly the same as yours. . . . With you I shall either 
live or die. . . . The government means to spare me less than 
any of you, I know that. . . . They hate and persecute my 
kind worst of all. . . . I’m forced, just like all of you, to pro- 
tect the hves of my wife and family. . . . And so, for weeks 
now. I’ve been carefully thinking out what possible ways we 
have of defending ourselves. . . . Listen here, I was terribly 
scared at first, but I’m not now, any longer. . . . I’m fid! of 
hope. ... With God’s help, we aren’t going to die. . . . I’m 
not telling you this as a vain fool, but as a man who’s seen 
what war is, as an officer. . . .” 

His thoughts found clearer and clearer words. The intense, 
concentrated labour of the last few weeks was coming in use- 
ful. The number of fully thought-out problems gave him more 
and more inner certainty. This certainty of systematic thought 
—thought, as he had learned it m Europe— raised him far 
above these dully resigned prisoners of fate. This same sensa- 
tion of playful mastery had been his as a young man when at 
examinations he found that he could answer some question 
with an exhaustive knowledge, which at the same time selected 
Its own method of answering. He disposed of Aram’s desperate 
speech without once mentioning it directly. It would be a 
senseless attempt, to defy the saptichs in the streets, at house 
doors. It might perhaps be surprisingly successful for a few 
hours, but would only lead all the more inevitably, not to a 
quick death, but to a slow one, by torture, with the rape and 
bcfoulment of all the women. He, Bagradian, also wanted 
resistance. To the last drop of their blood. But there were 
better places to fight in than the valley, the village streets. He 
pointed in the direction of Musa Dagh, whose peaks, tower- 
ing behind the roof, seemed to look down and take part in the 

207 



great assembly. They probably all remembered the old stories 
in which the Damlayik had offered help and protection to 
escaping Armenians. “And it would need a very big force 
really to surround and storm the Damlayik. Jemal Pasha needs 
every man he can get. He has something more important to 
do than turn out a few thousand Armenians. We shall easily 
finish off the saptiehs. A few hundred determined men with, 
rifles are all we need to defend the mountain. We have the 
men, and the rifles too.” 

He raised his hand, as though for an oath. “I engage my- 
self, here, before you all, to lead that defence in such a way 
that our women and children will live longer than they would 
on a convoy. We can hold out for several weeks, maybe for 
months. Who knows? Perhaps by then God will grant that 
the war may be over. Then we’re certain to be relieved. And» 
even if peace doesn’t come, we’ve still always got the sea be- 
hind us. Cyprus, with its French and English battleships, is 
near. Mayn’t we hope that one day one of those ships will 
come down the coast, and that we shall reach it with our 
signals, and get help ? But, even if there’s no such good fortune 
in store for us, there’ll still be plenty of time for dying. And 
then at least we shan’t need to despise ourselves as defenceless 
sheep.” 

The effect of this speech was by no means clear. It looked 
as though now, for the first time, these people were being 
roused out of their torpor to the full consciousness of their 
fate. Gabriel thought at first that cither they had not under- 
stood him or were rejecting his scheme with howls of rage. 
This solid mass fell apart. Women screamed. An impact of 
hoarse, masculine oaths. A lurching, this way and that. Where 
were the furrowed and resigned gricf-stricken peasant faces, 
and where the veils of deathly quiet? A savage brawl seemed 
to begin. The men yelled at one another, they shouted and 
tugged at each other’s clothes, each other’s beards even. Yet all 
this was far less disputation than it was a wild unburdening, 

208 



a blowing sky-high o£ the rigid impotence, the stealthy con- 
sciousness of death — ^violently released by these first words of 
trust and energy. 

Whdt? Among these thousands, who now bellowed and 
raved m this unchained torrent of desperation, had there not 
been one to conceive this very simple thought in the long days 
of suspense allowed them.'* A thought so close to them by 
tradition? Had it needed a “gentleman from Europe,” a 
“strong man,” to come and speak it? Yes, the same thought 
had occurred to many among these thousands, but only as an 
idle day-dream. Nor, in their most secret conversations had it 
ever forced its way to utterance. Till a few hours before they 
had all still told themselves, lost in their artificial stupor, that 
this nemesis might draw in its claws and drift away across 
Musa Dagh. After all, what were they? Wretched villagers, a 
persecuted race on a beleaguered island, without a city at their 
backs. There were few Armenians in Antioch, and such as 
lived there were money-changers, bazaar merchants, specu- 
lators in gram, and so by no means the right sort of agitators 
and allies. And again, m Alexandretta there was only a very 
small, rich colony — ^bankers and war contractors — who lived in 
ornate villas, just as they did in Beirut. Such anxious magnates 
had not even a thought for the petty mountaineers of Musa 
Dagh. There was not one such individual as old Avetis Ba- 
gradian among them. They bolted the shutters of their villas 
and crept into the darkest corner to hide. Two or three, to 
save their lives and property, had gone over to Islam, sub- 
mitted themselves to the blunt, circumcising knife of the mul- 
lah. Oh, those people m the far north-east had an easy time of 
it — those citizens of Van and Urfa. Van and Urfa were the 
two big Armenian towns, full of weapons and traditional 
defiance. There were clever people there, the deputies of the 
Dashnakzagan. There it was easy to talk of resistance and to 
organize it. But who would dare speak such impious thoughts 
in wretched Yoghonoluk? Armed resistance to the civil and 

ao9 



military powers? Everyone born in these parts felt in his bones 
a respect, mingled with terror, of the state. The state, the 
hereditary enemy. The state — that is to say, the saptieh, who 
could arrest or thrash you for no reason; the state — that is to 
say the filthy government office, with its picture of the Sultan, 
its text from the Koran, its spittle-covered tiles, where one paid 
one’s bedel. The state meant huge, forbidding barrack squares, 
where one served as a private under the fists of the chaush, 
the onbashi, and where a special form of bastinado had been 
devised to punish Armenians. So that therefore it is more than 
comprehensible that — apart from Pastor Tomasian’s futile out- 
burst— it should have been a stranger, a freed man, not a na- 
tive, who hurled down the first systematic thought of resist- 
ance into this crowd. Only such an emancipated foreigner had 
the necessary freedom from guilty feelings to enable him to 
speak out such a thought. And the people was still far from 
feeling at home in it. It looked as if this brawl would never 
end. It kept increasing Voices snarled, and fists were shaken, 
in a fashion altogether incongruous to these usually shy women 
and grave men. Naturally, too, the children, whose mothers 
were either nursing them or carrying them pickaback, sharp- 
ened the general hubbub with their wails No doubt even they 
could sense in their souls the peril of this moment and with 
shrill sobs struggled against impending death. Gabriel looked 
down silently into the whirlpool. Ter Haigasun came towards 
him. He touched Bagradian’s shoulders with all ten finger-tips. 
\\. vias attempt, at an enteiace, a gettMte at. onte 

of blessing and abnegation. Gabriel may perhaps have read 
in the depths of those resolute, humble eyes: “So we’ve joined 
forces then, without saymg a word to each other.’’ This at- 
tempt at an embrace at once embarrassed and held Gabriel 
rigid. Ter Haigasun’s emaciated fingers slipped down off his 
shoulders. 

Meanwhile Pastor Harutiun Nokhudian was doing his best 
tQ subdue the crowd. The small, spare man had to struggle 

210 



with his wife as he was doing it, who thrust herself against 
him and did her best to prevent his saying anything impru- 
dent. He could only manage to make himself heard by de- 
grees. His reedy voice had to strain itself to its highest pitch: 
“Christ strictly enjoins us not to withstand authority. Christ 
strictly enjoins us not to resist evil. My office is the gospel. As 
the shepherd of my flock, I must disapprove of all recalci- 
trance.” 

This pastor, whom Bagradian always considered as an ail- 
ing, tinud little man, showed great resolution in defending 
his own point of view. He described the consequences of 
armed resistance as he foresaw them. Such a revolt would at 
last give the government its right to change an infamous de- 
cree into a ruthlessly vindictive extermination. And then death 
would have ceased to be a meritorious discipleship to Christ’s 
passion. It would have become the lawful punishment of 
rebels. Not only would the souls of all these here assembled 
be cursed by God for impious rebellion, but its last effects 
would inevitably be felt by the whole people— it would be 
used against all Armenian sons and daughters. They would 
have given their masters the welcome pretext to brand the 
Armenian millet before the whole world as disturbers of the 
common peace — as traitors. A good woman, even if her hus- 
band ill-treats her, has no right to surrender her house to 
strangers. Such was the view of Harutiun Nokhudian — whose 
own domestic arrangements did not go very far to bear out 
his contention, since the wife of his bosom was his tyrant, and 
not only in what concerned his health. His strained v<Ka/ 
cords nearly gave out. 

“And which of us shall say for certain that our banishment 
wust necessarily end as Ter Haigasun and Aram Tomasian 
prophesy? Are not God’s decrees insautable for them aiso? 
Has He not the power to send help from all sides ^ Are there 
not human beings everywhere, who can pity, even among 
Turks, Kurds, Arabs? If We keep our trust in God, shall we 


2II 



not find food and shelter everywhere? Even among strangers? 
Is it not possible even now, while we despair, that help may 
be on Its way? If it does not reach us here, at least it may 
reach us in Aleppo. If not in Aleppo, at least we may hope 
for the next halung-place. Our bodies may have to suffer 
bitterly, but our souls will be free. If we have to choose be- 
tween sinful and innocent death, why should we choose to 
die in sin?” 

Nokhudian could not finish his speech, for his thin voice 
was thrust out of the way by the deep, decisive tones of a 
woman. Could this bellicose matron in black really be httle 
mother Antaram, the doctor’s wife? Was it really Mairik 
Antaram, the helpful, the succouring, the little mother of vil- 
lage mothers, from whom the very people she helped and ad- 
vised scarcely ever heard a long speech? She was so exated 
that her hlack lace shawl had slipped half off her hair, not yet 
entirely grey and parted down the centre. Her bold nose jutted 
imperiously from her flushed face. That vigorous torso, spring- 
ing up from between wide hips, held high her erect head. The 
clear blue eyes were netted in a thousand belligerent wrinkles. 
And yet Antaram Altouni’s magnificent wrath made her look 
young again. 

“I’m a woman.” The full voice, by its sheer challenge, got 
absolute quiet with its first sounds. “I’m a woman, and I speak 
for all the women here. Many of us have suffered. My heart 
has failed me again and again. It’s a long time since I’ve cared 
whether I die or not. I don’t mmd how soon I do die. But 
I’m not going to die like a cur on the highroad. I’m not going 
to he out rotting in the fields. Not I! Nor do I mean to go 
on living in a concentration camp, among all those rascally 
murderers, and the poor women they’ve befouled. None of us 
women means to do it — no, not one of us I And if you men 
are so cowardly that you’d rather stay on here and be slaught- 
ered, we women alone will arm ourselves and go up on Musa 
INgh with Gabriel Bagradian.” 


2X2 



This spirited appeal raised a far noisier tumult than the last 
It looked as though at any minute now these madmen might 
whip out knives against each other and so anticipate Turkish 
blood-letting. The schoolteachers, headed by Shatakhian, were 
already preparing to rush the crowd and act as police — Ter 
Haigasun quietly beckoned them back. He knew his people 
better than all these teachers and mukhtars. Such vociferations 
were not vindictive. Empty excitement. The mind of these 
thousands had still not really digested the thought of bamsh- 
ment. Now it had slowly to assimilate the challenging voices 
of the speech-makers. A glance from the priest said: “Just 
leave them alone.” He watched the tumult with patient eyes. 
Women’s voices, roused by Antaram, were more and more 
gainmg the upper hand. Ter Haigasun also prevented would- 
be orators — Oskanian, the teacher, for instance — ^from saying 
more. He was right. The din, with nothing there to fodder 
It, died down, sooner than was expected. In a few minutes this 
tumult had stifled itself, and only grunts and sobs were left 
over. Now was Ter Haigasun’s chance to clear things up and 
bring them speedily to a head. He waved his right hand to get 
them quiet. 

“It’s all quite simple.” He did not use too much of his voice 
but scanned each syllabic very sharply, so that his words bored 
their way into the dull comprehension of the mass. “Two pro- 
posals have been made to you. Those are the only two ways 
we can go. There’s no other way for us except these two. The 
one. Pastor Nokhudian’s way, takes you eastwards with the 
sapuehs. The other, Gabriel Bagradian’s way, leads us up, 
with our own weapons, on to the Damlayik. Each of you is 
perfectly free to choose for himself which way to go, as his 
will and understanding may dictate to him. There’s nothing 
more to say about that, since ail that’s been said already. I 
want to make the decision very easy for you. Pastor Nokhud- 
ian will be so good as to stand over there in the empty yard, 
on the other side of those ropes. Let everyone who agrees with 

213 



the pastor, and would rather go into exile, go across and stand 
with him. Those on the side of Gagrid Bagradian, stay here, 
where he is. No need to hurry. There’s plenty of time.” 

Sudden, deep silence. Only Madame Nokhudian’s rapid, 
almost yelping sobs became audible. The old pastor bowed his 
head, in its little cloth cap. A heavy load of thoughts seemed 
to bow his shoulders, drag him to earth. He remained a very 
long while in this thoughtful posture. And then his legs began 
to move. He trotted, in hesitant steps, to the place to which 
Ter Haigasun had assigned him. He lifted the clothes hne 
with a dumsy movement over his head. The stable-yard 
reached almost to the villa. Only a stretch of grass, with a wall 
of magnolia bushes, lay in between. The big yard was com- 
pletely empty. Stable-boys and house servants had both 
crowded to the meeting. Nokhudian’s short little legs made 
the most of this way of decision; they needed quite a while to 
reach the magnolia bushes, where he took up his position, his 
back to the crowd His wife, shaken with sobs, came after him. 
Another, still longer, emptier pause, with not a word in it. 
Only then did one or two people free themselves from the 
centre of the crowd, force a way out of it, and, measuring out 
the intervening space with the same gentle, thoughtful steps, 
take up their stand beside Pastor Nokhudian. 

At first there were only a few— -the elders of the Protestant 
congregation of Bitias, with their wives. But, little by little, 
the number of those who had chosen exile increased, until at 
last the pastor had almost his whole congregation, young and 
old. A few more joined them, from other villages; but these 
were old and burdened people, whose strength to resist had 
already failed them, or who, at the very end of their lives, 
really feared to set heaven against themselves. With their 
hands over their breasts as if in prayer, they took the first steps 
of the road to Calvary. All this happened so deliberately, in 
so gently introverted a manner, that it looked less like a de- 
cision pregnant with consequences than a religious ceremony. 

214 



It was as though these people were stepping modestly, slowly, 
into the grave, without first havmg stretched themselves out 
to die. One. And then another. A couple. And then several. 
Then another couple. Nokhudian’s disciples at last increased 
to something hke four hundred souls, not counting those of 
the Protestant congregation who, from sickness or some other 
cause, had had to stop away from the meeting. With him the 
pastor took a fair proportion of the inhabitants of Bitias, the 
second largest commune of the valley. The mass of people 
watched with fascinated eyes the hesitant steps of these others, 
resolved for obedience. Not a word of comment. Until, last of 
all, very late in joining Nokhudian’s band, came a httle, 
shrivelled-up man, lurching over his stick like a drunkard, 
and talking to himself. This figure of fun, well known to all 
the people of Kebussiye, who did not really seem to know 
what was happening, provoked a cry of arrogant hatred in 
the crowd. At first it was no more than the sight of a half-wit 
producing the usual mahee. Then came the arrogance: Here 
were the brave, and there the cowards. Here the strong, the 
men of sterling worth, and there the cripples. It was only that 
one young man had bawled something derisive, and that a 
gust of laughter shook the crowd. But Ter Haigasun was al- 
ready pushing his way into the densely packed mass, which 
he thrust away from him with both arms, as though he would 
reach to very heart of this baseness, pounce on the giber, drag 
him out, and thrash him. His face looked dark with anger. 
His hood fell back off his close-cropped, iron-grey hair. Mur- 
der was glinting in his eyes: “What cur dared? What brutes 
are laughing?” 

Vehemently he beat upon his breast, again and again, to 
punish at least himself for the mocker and still his rage. Then, 
in the resumed stillness, he went across to Harutiun Nokhud- 
ian and his band, stopped a little distance away from them, 
bowed very low, and said in his resonant, priestly voice: “To 
us you will always be holy. May we be holy to you.” 

215 



Bagradian was thinking feverishly. An unstemmed rush of 
new ideas swept him along. The great work of defence went 
ardently forward in his mind. Ever since the decision had 
fallen, he had been only half listening to what happened. His 
whippcd-up thoughts noted and reflected simultaneously. What 
a giant of inspiration this Ter Haigasun had shown himself 
to be' “It’s invaluable,” the thought flashed through him, “that 
I should have this authority rooted in the soil behind me.” 
And It seemed a further stroke of fortune that the good No- 
khudian, and a few hundred more non-combatants, should 
have chosen otherwise. “They’ll be useful in keeping our move- 
ments anil decisions from the saptiehs till the very last minute. 
Ihc villages mustn’t be empty. The Turks mustn’t begin to 
suspect belore we’re ready for them.” Gabriel’s plan went on 
unfolding itself His forbears’ calculating intelligence, all the 
shrewdness of grandfather Avetis, were uppermost now in 
this, their other-worldly grandson, that simple idealist at whom 
his more distant relations, hard-headed merchants, had always 
smiled From eveiy considered actuality there spun forth its 
inevitable senes of ghostly threads of future consequence, and 
not one thread was inessential. An impetuous ambition took 
hold of Bagradian. So, according to Ah Nassif’s report, the 
mudir would arrive with his escort three days after this pres- 
ent Sunday. By Wednesday, therefore, all the foundations 
would have to be laid, from which to build in the days that 
followed. Now was the moment to test what he had always 
believed, that mind must triumph over matter, even in its 
highest, most intense manifestations — force and chance. 

No wonder that, held fast by his scheming thoughts, intoxi- 
cated with self-reliance, he should have forgotten even his 
wife, been scaicely conscious of all the bustle surrounding him. 
All this was sheer waste of time. A few village speech-makers 
were still talking. But what, now that the great die was cast, 
did their clumsy, empty words matter to him ^ They were all 
equally bellicose — not a single voice in opposiuon. Ter Hai- 

3i6 



gasun gave the people plenty of breathing-space for this spirit 
of valiant resolution to take deep anchorage in their midst, so 
that the hesitant and timid might be drawn in. But, before the 
first wave of exhaustion threatened, he stepped forward, in- 
terrupting the speaker, and decreed that they should at once 
choose representatives. The village clerk of Yoghonoluk went 
round with a basket, collecting voting-papers. The school- 
teachers, helped by Avakian, lost no time in beginning the 
count inside the villa. 

It goes without saying that the majority of votes went to 
Ter Haigasun. Immediately after him came the doctor. Then 
the seven mukhtars and three village priests, with the votes of 
their congregations. Then, with a considerable gap, Apothe- 
cary Krikor, and some of the schoolteachers, among whom, of 
course, were Shatakhian and Oskaman. Gabriel got about the 
same number of votes as Pastor Aram Tomasian. Among the 
non-official villagers old Tomasian and Chaush Nurhan, the 
ex-regular sergeant, were elected to leadership. One woman, 
Mairik Antaram, received a large number of votes — in these 
parts a decided innovation. She energetically refused to accept. 
Shatakhian read out the results. Those selected retired into 
the house to draw up their rules as a corpoiate body. Gabriel 
had told Kristaphor and Missak to have everything ready for 
a sitting in the big selamlik — cold food, wine, and coffee. The 
crowd — even those mothers with small childien at home to 
be looked after— remained m the grounds, encamped here and 
there in the big garden. Comestibles were sent for, from Yo- 
ghonoluk. The master of the house sent out a ration of water, 
wine, fruit, and tobacco. Soon gossip, mingled with cigarette 
smoke and the bubbling of comfortable chibuks, rose in the 
evening air, as though nothing had happened. Pastor Nokhud- 
ian’s adherents left with their leader to go home to Bitias. It 
was a quiet and dreary setting forth. A few of the younger 
of this band turned back at the garden door and joined the 
main encamped body of the people, whose zest for life, after 

217 



weeks of coma, seemed for the first time now to have returned. 
Now m this short, fugitive interval between everyday routine 
and the unknown, incomprehensible pleasure invaded their 
souls. Why? Because more than mere suffering lay before 
them, because, though they suffered, m and above their pain 
there would be action. 

Thb night of Musa Dagh quickly absorbed the July twilight 
Eastward, a horizontal half-moon pushed off from the ragged 
peaks of the Amanus and sailed into open sky. The doors of 
Villa Bagradian stood wide open. The inquisitive might go in 
and out unhindered. The leaders of the people had gathered 
in the big sclamlik. This counal of leaders, a group of thirty, 
seemed to itself at first very helpless. The mayors of the other 
villages, the priests and schoolteachers, who were in this house 
for the first time, sat or stood about in awkward sdences. 
Some may only now have become aware of the full audacity 
of this step to which the unexpected, impetuous course of 
the great assembly had committed them. Gabriel instantly 
sensed an acrid stink of flickering courage, given off by certain 
of the chosen. The lukewarm must on no account be allowed 
to “come to their senses’’; no fundamental “if’s” or “but’s" 
must be spoken. The people had taken its lawful decision; 
there could be no vacillations now; these fires of defensive 
resolution should be fanned into a towering flame. It was 
Bagradian’s ]ob as master of the house to put an end to this 
shapeless hanging about of tepid men, to get the people’s coun- 
al under way, and to have fruitful tasks ready for all. Every 
advantage of his Western education must make itself felt. He 
did the only thing that was to be done. He turned with 
solemnity to Ter Haigasun. 

“Ter Haigasun, it was more than the people outside that 
elected you. I speak for all here, when I say this: We beg you 
to be the supreme head of our struggle. In peace-time you held 
an office of leadership and, as spiritual head of the communes^ 

218 



you have done your duty with the greatest self-sacriHce till 
today. It is God’s will, by the cruelty of men, to extend your 
powers. We all want to make you the solemn promise that, in 
every decision we may make, m every precautionary measure 
on which we decide, we will submit to your final veto without 
a murmur. Not until you have endorsed them, shall the resolu> 
tions of this council of leaders become valid and so be given 
the power of laws, binding on our whole people.” 

This little speech brought its self-evident result. Nobody else 
but Ter Haigasun could possibly have been chosen supreme 
head. Not even Mr. Schoolmaster Hrand Oskanian would 
have ventured a secret sneer at this established fact. And Ga- 
briel’s words sounded agreeably in the ears of his listeners, 
especially of those to whom he was still a mistrusted foreigner. 
Two trains of thought brought this soothing effect: Many had 
been expecting that “the Frenchman” would snatch the leader- 
ship on the strength of his Western superiority. And then — an 
even deeper reason — Bagradian’s speech, its solemn form as 
well as Its legal content, prepared the ground on which all 
future decisions could be built up. These few words had quite 
imperceptibly laid down the fundamental law for this newly 
constituted entity about to form itself. Ter Haigasun made the 
sign of the cross in silence, to show that he consented to take 
office, with all its heavy responsibility. From this moment 
there were two legal powers — the Council of Leaders and the 
Supreme Head of the People, who, though he presided over 
the counal, had alone the power to make its resolutions legally 
valid. Every member came up to Ter Haigasun to kiss his 
hand, according to custom, and took the oath. Only when this 
ceremony was over, did a wide circle take form along several 
tables set end to end. Gabriel Bagradian had war maps and 
complete data in front of him. Samuel Avakian stood behind 
him, ready to be consulted. When Gabriel, with a look, had 
asked for silence, he stood up. 

“My friends, the sun went down two hours ago, and it will 

219 



have risen again in another six. We have only about six hours 
to get through the whole of our thinking. When we go out 
tomorrow morning, to face the people again, there must be no 
more uncertainty. Our will must be clear and unanimous. 

“But this IS the most necessary measure. In the very first 
hours of tomorrow morning all who are young and strong 
enough must go up to the Damlayik and begin to build the 
fortifications. I beg you, therefore, to save time. It is an ad- 
vantage to all of us that some time ago I worked out all the 
details of our plan of defence. I can give you my suggestions at 
once. I think that in these sittings it will be best to work by 
the same rules as those at our communal meetings. I ask Ter 
Haigasun’s leave to explain my plan. . . 

Ter Haigasun, as his habit was, half shut his eyes, giving 
his face a tired and agonized look. “Let us hear Gabriel Ba- 
gradian.” 

Gabriel spread out the best of Avakian’s three maps. “We 
shall have a thousand minor tasks to perform, but, if once we 
look at the thing correctly, we find that they all come under 
two mam headings. The first and most important is our actual 
method of defence. Even our second, the way we organize 
our life together, must serve that struggle above all. I’U begin 
with it. . . 

Pastor Aram Tomasian raised a hand to interrupt. “We all 
know that Gabriel Bagradian, as an officer, knows most about 
military matters. The fighting leadership goes to him. . . .” 

All hands went up in assent to this. But Pastor Aram had 
not done yet: “For some ume Gabriel Bagradian has been 
concentrating his whole mind on the plan of defence. It would 
be best to leave him to arrange our resistance. I therefore sug- 
gest that we postpone all discussion of his tactical scheme tdl 
we’ve a clear idea how, and for how long, five thousand peo- 
ple, cut off from the rest of the world, can live on the Dam- 
layik.” 

Gabriel, who had been in full spate, sighed and let his maps 

220 



tall back on the table. “My arrangements included that prob- 
lem. I’ve made notes on these maps for everything necessary 
to maintain hfe. But, if Pastor Tomasian likes, I’m perfectly 
ready to put off explaining my scheme of defence.” 

Bedros Altouni, the doctor, had not long managed to sit 
quietly in his parliamentary seat. He wandered, growlmg, 
about the room, to suggest that, at this moment of urgent 
peril, debates, with a show of hands and speeches, seemed to 
him ridiculous frivolity. His growlmg impatience was in sharp 
contrast to the dignified impassivity of Krikor, who sat im- 
mobile, in an attitude which seemed to ask: “When shall I 
be free to escape in peace from this barbarous encroachment 
on the one thing in life which beseems me or makes it worth 
living?” The doctor, fidgeting round the room, made a sudden 
remark, which had nothing whatever to do with present busi- 
ness; “Five thousand people are five thousand people, and the 
heat of the sun’s the heat of the sun. And cloudbursts are 
cloudbursts.” 

Gabriel, to whom these problems of housing, of the town 
enclosure, the care of the children, had caused so many sleep- 
less nights, took up this remark of the doctor. “It would be 
best for our protection to keep all the children between the 
ages of two and seven m one shelter.” 

The hitherto silent Ter Haigasun rejected this suggestion 
most decisively. “What Gabriel Bagradian has just advised 
would mean the beginning of very dangerous disorders. We 
must not sunder what God and time have bound together. 
On the contrary, it seems to me highly essential that single 
parishes, and in fact, single families, should not be separated 
more than is absolutely necessary. Relations ought all to have 
their own separate encampment, every village its camping- 
ground. The mukhtars to be responsible to their own people, 
as usual. We ought to change the relationships to which we 
are accustomed down here as little as possible.” 

Emphatic, unanimous assent, which implied a minor fail- 


221 



ure for Bagradian. Ter Haigasun had guaranteed them as close 
an approximation as possible to their normal life. The pros- 
pect had a very soothing effect. For, to peasants, the worst, 
most cruel thing that can befall them is expressed in the one 
word — change. But Gabriel would not give way so easily. He 
sent round the map, with his drawing of the town enclosure. 
Everyone recognized the wide meadow pasturage of the com- 
munal flocks. It began to dawn on them that this big, stone- 
less expanse of grass was the only possible camping-ground. 
There would have been room enough for two thousand fam- 
ilies, let alone one thousand, on it Gabriel skilfully compro- 
mised with Ter Haigasun. The allotment of family and com- 
munal camping-grounds could easily be arranged as the priest 
desired. And he found himself agreeing with Ter Haigasun. 
On the other hand, they would have to admit that the thou- 
sand families could not possibly run separate establishments; 
that It would never work if the common resources were not 
pooled. They need only work out the saving in food and fuel, 
the gain in free labour power. Apart from this, there would 
really be no possibility of holding out for a long time if it 
were not arranged that beasts must be slaughtered, bread and 
grain distributed, goat’s milk allotted to children and invahds, 
only according to strictly determined regulations. Whatever 
else might be done to classify people according to family, the 
ticklish question of private ownership could not be got round. 
Since he, Bagradian, was willing to place his whole posses- 
sions, in so far as they were obtainable and divisible, at the 
disposal of the common defence — all the cattle on his farm, 
all the supplies in his house and cellar — everyone else must 
contribute his share. These circumstances imperatively de- 
manded the communal distribution of goods. It would be quite 
impossible for each individual family to slaughter its own 
sheep. Milk must go to those who needed it, and not, for 
instance, to any strong, well-fed people who happened to own 
a couple of goats. The notion, which some perhaps still cher- 

222 



ishcd, that up on the Damlayik it would still be possible to 
buy certain privileges for money, was a childish dream. From 
the instant the communes arrived in camp, money would cease 
to have the remotest value. And all barter would have to be 
strictly forbidden, since from that day on all goods would be 
the goods of the people, to be used to defend their lives in 
battle. No one who had clearly perceived that exile meant the 
loss of all he possessed would surely think the demands of 
Musa Dagh worth another second’s hesitation. 

But at once it was plain that in making these just demands 
Gabriel had erred most sadly. It had not so much as entered 
these peasant minds — ^though a few hours back they had 
known with such inevitable certainty that they stood face to 
face with exile and death — that now their own would cease 
to belong to them. It was more than the mere loss that pro- 
duced their obstinacy — it was the disciplined inevitability, the 
“European,” in Gabriel’s words. This led on to a time-wasting 
argument, which was fruitless, if for no other reason than that 
the most determined peasant skull could conceive no alterna- 
tive. A bandying of words which only served to vent disgrun- 
tlcment. Ter Haigasun waited a certain time. A short, warning 
glance across to Gabriel: “It’s necessary to be rather careful 
in making these people see the obvious.” Then he interrupted 
their empty chatter: 

“We are going up to the mountain and shall have to live 
there. Many things will arrange themselves which we needn’t 
bother our heads discussing at present. It would be better if 
you mukhtars would begin to think out the most urgent mat- 
ters: Will It be possible to have enough supplies taken up 
there? For how many weeks do you think they’ll be likely 
to last? Is there any possible means of supplementing them?” 

And here Pastor Tomasian had another, very feasible sug- 
gestion. It was the mukhtars’ business to get together and work 
out their own estimate of provisions, and scheme for the com- 
imssariat. And this not oiily applied to the commissariat, but 

223 



to all other matters to be discussed. This general council was 
unwieldy. They were not here to talk and argue, but to work. 
He, Aram Tomasian, therefore proposed that the various 
departments should get together, and each form a separate 
committee. Each of these committees to be presided over by a 
head, named by Ter Haigasun. The heads to form a closer, 
separate council which should have in its hands the actual 
management of affairs. There would be five departments: 
First, Defence; second. Legislation, which concerned Ter 
Haigasun alone; then came Internal Order; then all that con- 
cerned Public Health and Sickness; and lastly the special af- 
fairs of single communes, as against those of the whole com- 
munity. Gabiiel enthusiastically welcomed the young pastor’s 
inspiration, and for the first time Dr. Altouni also gave some 
signs of assent. No one demurred. Ter Haigasun, to whom the 
inevitable chatter of a big council was as uncongenial as to 
Aram, at once endorsed this legislative arrangement. Chaush 
Nurhan, the teacher Shatakhian, and two younger men, whom 
he selected, were assigned as a military committee to assist 
Gabriel. Aram Tomasian also made one of this Committee of 
Defence. In the same way Gabriel was himself a member of 
the Committee of Internal Order, led by the pastor. This 
committee made itself responsible for everything connected 
with the obtaining and rauoning of supplies Therefore, 
Thomas Kebiissyan and the other mukhtars were members. 
The elder Tomasian, the builder, found himself solely en- 
trusted with the business of erecting huts It need scarcely be 
said that Dr. Altouni and the detached apothecary, Krikor, 
had to form the Committee of Public Health. With that they 
had all achieved a rough and ready division of labour. In the 
next few hours these isolated groups were to make what pro- 
vision they could for their departments So that then, in the 
early morning, a short sitting of the General Council would 
be enough to estimate results. The mukhtars went outside to 
get du'cctly from their villagers a possible estimate of supplies. 

224 



Gabriel was to follow them later and, with their help, to 
muster the youngest, strongest men, who, early next day, were 
to begin digging-operations on the main line of trenches be- 
tween the north peaks. Meanwhile, map in hand, he eagerly 
explained his plan of defence to Ter Haigasun, Aram Tomas- 
ian, and the rest. Even Krikor began to be curious and came 
across to listen. 

Only one person stood aside, with inscrutably folded arms — 
Hrand Oskanian, naturally. That sombre schoolteacher had 
met with yet another rebuff. No leading role had been allotted 
him — no, not even a fairly respectable second. While his col- 
league Shatakhian had been given a seat on the Committee 
of Defence, Ter Haigasun, in his deep hatred of the other, 
silent pedagogue, had condemned him to go on “teaching 
school" and keeping the children in order. That was the 
priest’s revenge for the fact that at the communal elections 
Hrand Oskanian, the poet of Musa Dagh, had been elected 
by hundreds of votes. Icily reserved, Oskanian was already 
wondering whether or not to leave the assembly and go home. 
Then he grew proudly conscious of the fact that the many by 
whom he had been chosen looked up to him with trustful eyes 
and that, moreover, the priest would be more riled by his 
presence than by his absence. 

Shortly after midnight the council was suddenly suspended- 
As often happens in such cases, it had occurred to no one to 
make sure of that on which the whole future would depend. 
Fifty Mausers and two hundred and fifty Greek service-rifles 
still lay buried in a grave in the cemetery. They must be dug 
up instantly and carried up the Damlayik before morning, 
with the munitions. Though Gabriel did not mistrust ^ 
Nassif’s report, there was still always the possibility that in the 
course of the next twenty-four hours fresh saptiehs might come 
to the villages, to make a sudden search for arms. A deputation 
of six went off, post-haste, to the churchyard of Yoghonoluk, 
situated beyond the village on the road to Habibli. The two 

225 



grave-diggers came last. The rifles, thanks to Nurhan the 
armourer's foresight, had been laid in bricked graves. They 
awaited their glorious resurrection enveloped in rags, in air- 
Ught coffins, bedded in straw. Only four weeks previously 
Chaush Nurhan had inspected them summarily by torchhght 
and found them in perfect condition Scarcely one breech-lock 
had rusted. Nor had the cartridges suffered in any way. That 
night these heavy chests, fifteen in all, were hauled up for 
ever out of the graves. It was hard work. Since not many hands 
were there to do it, Ter Haigasun, who had flung off his cas- 
sock, did a muscular share. Later a couple of the strong shaggy 
donkeys of the district were fetched, so that at last, towards 
morning, led by Chaush Nurhan, a secret caravan set out for 
the northern mountain pass through the deserted villages of 
Azir and Bitias. 

Not till an hour before sunrise could Ter Haigasun get 
back to the selamlik of Villa Bagradian. The garden looked 
like a corpse-strewn batdeficld. Not even the people of Yog- 
honoluk had gone home. Ter Haigasun, like a general among 
the dead, had to step across the motionless sleepers. 

Thanks to the energy of Bagradian — who kept urging them 
on — the members of the subcommittees had done some very 
useful work. The main hncs of the conditions of defence and 
rationing had been laid down. A muster of the fighters had 
been drawn up and approxunatc calculations made of the 
amounts and kinds of obtainable foodstuffs. Provision had 
also been made for the building of a colony of huts, a hospital 
shelter, and a larger government barrack. With Ter Haigasun’s 
return the General Council reassembled. Gabriel briefly re- 
ported decisions taken to the chief. With Aram Tomasian’s 
energetic support he had managed to get nearly all his sug- 
gestions accepted. Ter Haigasim gave his assent to every- 
thing, with an absent-looking face and half-closed eyes, as 
though he did not believe that this new life would be tna/li- 
subjea to resolutions. Both lights and men were on the wane, 

226 



yet their eyes still showed more excitement than fatigue. A 
glorious morning began to ghtter, deep silence descended on 
them all. The men stared out of the window at the gentle light 
of this bud of dawn, unfolding petal by petal. The pupils of 
their eyes shone, strangely dilated. No sound in this selamlik 
of the night watch save the scraping of two pencils — Avakian’s 
and the communal clerk’s — engaged in drafting a protocol of 
the most important resolutions. 

When the sun shone full and golden into the room, Gabriel 
put an end to this comatose dreaming. “I think we’ve all done 
our duty tonight, and that nothing’s forgotten.” 

“No. We’ve forgotten one thing — the most essential thing.” 
Ter Haigasun remained seated as he spoke, but his resonant 
voice brought all who had risen back to the table. The priest 
raised deep, signihcant eyes. He stressed each syllable; 

“The altar.” 

Then added with calm mattcr-of-factness that a great 
wooden altar must be set up, in the centre of the camp, as the 
holy place for prayer, the service of God. 

Towards five o’clock — the sun was high by now — Gabriel 
came into Juliette’s room on the top story. He found there a 
number of people who had sat up all night with Madame Ba- 
gradian. Stephan, for all his mother’s commands and entreaties, 
had not gone to bed. Now he lay on the sofa, fast asleep. 
Juliette had spread out a rug over him. She was standing lean- 
ing out of the window, with her back to the people in the 
room. Everyone here gave the impression of being alone, apart 
from the others. Iskuhi stiffly sat by the sleeping Stephan. 
Hovsannah, Pastor Tomasian’s wife, whose fears towards 
morning had driven her to the villa, sat sunk in an armchair, 
staring out at nothing. Mairik Antaram, less affected than any 
of the others by this night of alarums and excursions, listened 
at the open door to the buzz of voices from the council-room. 
But a man was also in the room. Monsieur Gonzague Maris 

»7 



had been keeping the ladies company all night and, although at 
the moment nobody noticed hun, he seemed to be the only 
person present who was not lost in his own thoughts. His 
beautifully brushed hair shone in the sunlight, unruffled by 
either his vigil or these events. His observant, indeed alert, 
velvet eyes, under the blunt angle of their brows, strayed here 
and there among the women. He seemed to be reading every 
wish, as It passed across these haggard faces, in order, gal- 
lantly, to fulfil It. 

Gabriel came a few steps nearer Juliette, but stopped and 
stared at Gonzague. “It’s a fact, isn’t it, that you have an 
American passport?’’ 

A mocking, rather scornful twist crept across the lips of the 
young Greek. “Would you care to look at it. Monsieur? Or my 
registration papers as a journalist?” 

His cool, slender fingers strayed to his pockets. Gabriel had 
ceased to notice him. He had hold of Juliette’s hand. The 
hand was not cold, but the life had gone out of it, it was 
shamming dead. All the more vivaaous, therefore, the eyes. 
There was in them a va et vient, an ebb and flow, as always 
at moments of conflict. Her nostrils quivered a little— a sign 
of resistance well known to Gabriel. For the first time in 
twenty-four hours a cloud of fatigue began to descend on him. 
He hesitated. Within him, hollowness and the void. They 
watched each other’s eyes in a long scrutiny, man and woman. 
Where was Gabriel’s wife? He could still feel her hand in 
his, hke an object, like unyielding porcelain — but she herself 
had slipped away from him. How many days’ marches and 
sea journeys away? But this time-devounng distance, longer 
and longer every second, not only increased from her to him, 
but from him to her. Here stood Juliette’s tall and beautiful 
body, so near, so entirely a part of his. Every inch of it must 
remember his kisses, the long neck, the shotdders, the breasts, 
the knees and shins, the very toes. This body had born Ste- 
phan, had endured for the future of the Bagradians. And now? 

228 



He could scarcely recognize it. He had lost the image of its 
nakedness. It was like having forgotten one’s name. But bad 
enough as it was to find some French lady standing here, with 
whom one had once had a haison — ^this lady had become an 
enemy, she was on the other side, had a seat on the extermi- 
nators’ councils, although she was herself an Armenian mother. 
Gabriel felt something huge and hard rise in his throat, 
without really noticing it. Only in the last half-second did he 
free himself of this choking sensation. 

“No . . . that isn’t possible . . . Juliette.” 

She put her head slyly on one side. “What isn’t possible? 
What do you mean?” 

He stared at the vivid colours outside the window, could 
distinguish no shapes. For several hours he had been making 
Armenian speeches, and French now crept back into his mind, 
outraged. He began, in a hesitant voice, in a hard, unusual 
accent, wh.ch seemed to set Juhette’s nerves still more on edge; 
“I mean . . . you’re right, I think . . . you mustn’t be 
dragged into this. . . . Why should you? ... You remember 
our talk that night? . . . You must get away. . . . You and 
Stephan.” 

She seemed to be weighing her words: “I remember exactly 
what we said . . . that time. . . . Unheard of as it is. I’m in 
this with you. ... I said so, then.” She had never used such 
a tone before, but that was a matter of indifference. She threw 
a reproachful glance at Hovsannah and Iskuhi, as though in 
them she recognized the responsible parties. 

Gabriel passed his hand twice across his eyes. He was again 
the man and leader of last night. “There’s a way out for you 
and Stephan. Not a safe or easy one. . . . But you’ve got a 
very strong will, Juliette.” 

A sharp, testing look came into her eyes. Roused wild beasts 
have such a look before they spring, in one long bound, away 
past a man or a danger into freedom. Perhaps, now, every 
impulse to flight was crouched, ready to spring, in Juliette. 

229 



But scarcely did Gabriel begin speaking when the glowering 
tension left her face; she became uncertain, dismayed, and sly. 

“Gonzague Maris will be leaving us today or tomorrow,” 
said Bagradian with the unanswerable decision of a leader. 
"He has an American passport. It’s invaluable in circum- 
stances like these. I’m sure, Maris, you won’t refuse to get my 
wife and son into safety. You can take the hunting-trap. It’s 
summer, and the roads in the valley are still passable. And 
I’ll give you reserve wheels and all four horses. Kristaphor 
will go with you, as well as the coachman; those two can 
get away as your servants. Via Sandcran and El-Maghara it’s 
only five or six hours to Arsus. I reckon you’ll have to walk 
the horses most of the way. The fifteen English miles to the 
coast, from Arsus to Alexandretta, are a trifle, because you can 
trot for hours along the sandy beach. In Arsus, I believe, there’s 
a small garrison. It won’t be hard for Mans to frighten the 
onbashi there with his passport.” 

Kristaphor had come in to ask his master for orders. Gabriel 
turned to him sharply. “Kristaphor, is it possible to get to 
Arsus, via Alexandretta, in ten hours with the hunting-trap?” 

The steward opened his eyes wide. “Eficndi, that depends 
on the Turks.” 

Bagradian’s voice grew sharper still. “I didn’t ask you that, 
Kristaphor. What I really mean is: Would you trust yourself 
to get the hanum, my son, and this American gentleman to 
Alexandretta?” 

Sweat stood out on the steward’s forehead. He looked like 
an old man, although he was only forty. It was not quite clear 
what It was that moved him — ^fcar of a hazardous adventure, 
or the sudden prospect of saving himself. His eyes strayed from 
Bagradian to Gonzague. At last a furtive look of wild joy 
came into them. But this he controlled at once, either out of 
respect for Bagradian or so as not to give himself away. “I 
could do it, Effendi. If the gendeman has a passport, the 
saptiehs won’t be able to touch us.” 

ajo 



After this explanation Gabnel sent Kristaphor back to the 
kitchen to prepare a copious breakfast for everyone. He con- 
tinued his instructions to Maris. Unluckily there was no 
American consul in Alexandretta, only German and Austro- 
Hungarian vice-consuls. He had made inquiries some time 
previously about these two. The German was called Hoff- 
mann, the Austrian, Belfante; they were both well-disposed 
European business men, who might be expected to do all they 
could to help. But since they were both Turkish alhes, it 
would be necessary to use the greatest discretion. 

“You’ll have to make up some story . . . Juhette is a Swiss, 
who has lost her passport in a travelling accident. . . . The 
vice<onsuls must get you a railway passport from the local 
military authorities. ... In the next few days they’ll be open- 
ing the branch line to Toprak Kaleh. . . . Hoffmann and 
Belfante will be sure to know whether the commandant can 
be bribed. If so, it’ll be all right. . . .” 

Gabriel had passed a great many sleepless nights thinking 
out these directions for escape — rejecting, altering, taking up 
again. There were various alternatives one in the Aleppo 
direction, another to Beirut. Yet now his jerky indications 
sounded as though he had only just thought of them. Juliette 
stared; she seemed not to be understanding a single word he 
said. 

“You must think out some plausible tale, Mans. ... It 
won’t be so easy to make them believe in the accident and the 
lost passport. . . . But that isn’t the mam thing. . . . Juliette 
. . . the mam thing is that you, an obvious European, won’t 
be suspected of belonging to us. And that m itself is enough to 
save you. . . . You’ll be taken for an adventuress, or at worst 
for a spy- . . . There’s certainly the danger of that. . . .You 
may be subjected to inconveniences and even perhaps have to 
suffer. But, after all, compared to what we’re suffering here — 
it’s scarcely worth mentiomng. . . . You must keep the one 
main object before your eyes — a way out of this. Free yourself 

*31 



from this people under a curse, with whom you’ve got involved 
through no fault of your own.” 

With these words, which he brought out in a loud staccato, 
Gabriel’s face suddenly lost its look of desperate stram. Juhette 
bent the upper half of her body a little backwards, an invol- 
untary movement, which seemed to suggest that she was ready 
to do her husband’s will. Gonzague Mans came a few steps 
nearer the couple — ^perhaps to suggest that, though he was 
ready, he did not want to force any decisions. All the others 
seemed to accentuate the suff lifelcssness of their attitudes, as 
if to mitigate their inconvenient presence at such a scene. Ga- 
biiel had regained his self-control. 

“Troop trains arc the only ones still running. You’ll have to 
bribe the commandant of every section of the line. . . . 
They’re usually old people, who’ve stuck to the old ways, and 
have nothing to do with Ittihad. . . . Once you’re in the train, 
you’ll have gained a good deal. . . . The hindrances will be 
frightful. . . . But every mile nearer Istanbul will improve 
matters. . . . And you’ll get to Istanbul even if it takes you 
weeks. . . . Juliette, there you must go straight to Mr. Mor- 
genthau. ... You still remember him? . . . The American 
ambassador.” 

Gabriel felt in his pocket and drew out an envelope bearing 
a legal seal. This, too, his last will, he had for weeks been 
keeping ready for Juliette without her knowledge. He held it 
out, silently. But slowly she drew back her hands and put 
them away behind her back. Gabriel, with a slight tilt of his 
head, pointed through the window at Musa Dagh, which 
stood as though molten in the strong morning sunlight. “I 
must go up there. The work’s beginmng. . . . I’m afraid I 
shan’t be able to get back today.” 

The outstretched hand, with its sealed letter, sank to his 
side. What kind of tears were these? , . . “And Juliette can’t 
control them,” marvelled Gabnel. “Is she crying about herself? 
Or about me? Is she saying good-bye?” He sensed her grief, 

232 



out could not recognize it He glanced round quickly at the 
others, those silent ones, still scarcely venturing to breathe lest 
perhaps they influence this decision. Gabriel longed for Juliette, 
who was standing only a few paces away from him. He spoke 
clearly and urgently, like a man who must talk to the woman 
he loves, across foreign countries, into a telephone; “I’ve al- 
ways known it would come, Juliette. . . . And yet I’ve never 
known it would come hkc this . . . between you and me.” 

Her answer came obscurely, drawn up out of depths, out- 
raged, and not torn by any sob. “And so that’s what you really 
thought of me!” 

>fobody knew how long Stephan had been awake, nor how 
mach he had clearly heard and understood of this conversa- 
tion between his parents. Only Iskuhi suddenly stood up, in 
a startled movement. Juliette knew, and had often marvelled 
at the fact, that between Gabriel and her son there was a rela 
tionship as shy as it was profound. Stephan, usually eager and 
voluble, was mostly silent in Gabriel’s presence, and Gabriel’s 
ma>iner with Stephan was also peculiarly reserved, serious, and 
spaiing of words Their long stay in Europe had obscured 
Asia, and yet not stifled it, in the souls of the two Bagradians. 
(In every house of the seven villages sons, no matter what their 
age, kissed their fathers’ hands every morning and evening. 
There were even a few strict houses in which, at meals, the 
father was not waited on by his women, but by his eldest 
son. And, on his side, the father honoured his eldest in a 
fashion tenderly severe, in accordance with a very ancient 
tradition, since a son is the next step on the shimmering stair- 
case of eternity ) True that, in the case of Stephan and Gabriel, 
this relationship had ceased to express itself in the ancient 
rituals prescribed; but it remained in a shyness which bound 
and separated them. Gabriel’s attitude to his own father had 
been the same. He, too, in his father’s presence, had always 
felt this constraint, this solemn shyness, so that he never dared 
8 tender word or a caress. All the more shattering, therefore^ 

233 



the effect of the cry uttered now by Gabriel’s son, as he real- 
ized that separation threatened them. He flung off the rug 
xvshed across to his father, and clung to him. 

“No, no . . . Father . . . You mustn’t send us away. I want 
io stay . . . stay with you!” 

What was it that looked at the father out of his son’s al- 
mond-shaped eyes? This was no longer a child whose life one 
arranges, but an adult impelled by his will and blood, a destiny 
fully shaped, no longer susceptible to moulding. He had grown 
and developed so much in the last few weeks. And yet this 
new perception did not exhaust the thing which his father 
encountered in Stephan’s eyes. He dissuaded feebly: “What’s 
coming, Stephan, won’t be child’s play.” 

Stephan’s cry of alarm changed to a defiant challenge: “I 
want to stay with you, Father ... I won’t go away.” 

I, I, F Jealous rage had hold of Juliette. Oh, these Arme- 
nians! How they stuck together! She herself had ceased to be 
there. Her child belonged to her, as much as to him! She 
wasn’t going to lose him. Yet, if she stood up for her rights, 
she’d lose Stephan. She came a decisive, almost an enraged, 
step nearer father and son. She caught Stephan’s hand to pull 
him towards her. But Gabriel knew only that Juliette had 
come to them “And so that’s what you really thought of me?” 
In that malicious question there had sail lurked a hint of in- 
decision. But this angry step was decisive for Gabriel. He drew 
Wife and child within his embrace. 

“May Jesus Christ be our help* Perhaps it’s better this way.” 
As he strove to calm himself with these words, he was invaded 
with a kind of dull horror, as though the Saviour he invoked 
had caused some door to shut against Stephan and Juliette. 
Before their embrace had achieved any real warmth and life, 
he let fall his arms, turned away, and left them. He stopped 
again in the doorway. “It goes without saying, Maris, you can 
have one of my horses for your journey.” 

Gonzague deepened his attentive smile. “I should accept your 

234 



kindness most gratefully if I didn’t have another request. I 
want you to allow me to share your life up on Musa Dagh. 
I’ve already talked it over with Krikor. He’s been asking Ter 
Haigasun’s permission for me, and he hasn’t refused.” 

Bagradian considered this. “I suppose you realize that later 
on the best American passport won’t help you in the least.” 

“I’ve lived here so long, Gabriel Bagradian, that I shouldn’t 
find it easy to leave you all. And, besides. I’m a journalist, you 
know. I may never get another chance like this.” 

Something in Gonzague gave Bagradian a sense of hostility, 
repelled him even. He tried to think how to refuse the young 
man. “The only question i^ will you ever get the chance of 
making any use of what you write?” 

Gonzague answered not only Gabriel, but all the people in 
the room: “I’ve often found that I could rely on my intuition. 
And I feel almost certain that things will turn out all right for 
you in the end. It’s only a feeling. But it’s the kind of feeling 
I can trust.” His alert velvet eyes glanced from Hovsannah to 
Iskuhi, from Iskuhi to Juliette, on whose face they rested. And 
Gonzague’s eyes seemed to be asking Madame Bagradian if 
she didn’t find his reasons convincing enough. 



7 


The Funeral of the Bdls 

For two days and nights Gabriel stayed up on the Damlayik. 
Even on the first evening he had to send Juliette word not to 
expect him. A variety of circumstances forced him to remain 
so long on this mountain ridge. Suddenly the Damlayik had 
ceased to be that idylhc mountain slope familiar to Gabriel, 
first as a place on which to dream, intimate in spite of its 
ruggedness, then as a strategic possibility. For the first time 
it showed him its true, unvarnished face. Everything on earth, 
not man alone, shows its reality only when we make demands 
on It. So too the Damlayik. Ttot after-glow of Paradise, those 
solitudes whose laughing well-springs made them alive, had 
vanished now off its wrinkled, forbidding aspect. The defence 
terrain chosen by Gabriel comprised a surface area of several 
square kilometres. This surface, as far as the fairly level town 
enclosure, was a diHicult up-and-down of hills, depressions, 
knolls, and gullies, which roughly made one aware of its in- 
equalities once It was neeessary to visit its various points many 
times a day. Gabriel wanted to avoid the waste of time and 
energy entailed in any not absolutely necessary descent into 
the valley. All the same, he had never felt so toughly vigorous 
in his whole life. His body, too, now that unsparing demands 
were being made on it, showed him both what he was and 
of what he was capable. By comparison the weeks he had 
spent as a front-line soldier in the Balkan war seemed slack 
and boring. In those days one had been mere human material, 
to be pushed forward under Sre, seemingly by some natural 



force, or to drift back in the same constant danger, with the 
same will-icss passivity. In the last few years Gabriel had 
often suAered from stomach trouble and palpitauons. These 
derangements of a pampered body were now as though blown 
away by a single breath of necessity. He no longer knew that 
he had a heart or a stomach, and simply did not notice the 
fact that three hours’ sleep on, or under, a blanket fully suf- 
ficed him, that a roll and some kind of tinned food stilled his 
hunger for the whole day. But, even though he thought very 
little about it, this proof that he was really a strong man filled 
him with a glow of pride. It was the pride which tingles 
through our substance only when our minds have defeated it 

His was occupied with much else. Most of those men m- 
tended as fighters had already forgathered on the mountain, 
together with a few of the stronger women and a few half- 
grown boys to be used as workers. All the rest had been 
shiewdly kept in the valley. There daily life was to seem to 
be going on quietly as usual, so that no rumour should spread 
of deserted villages. And these villagers had undertaken the 
task of getting as many stores as possible up the mountain in 
the dead of night. These could not all be loaded on to mules. 
The long beams and struts of old Tomasian’s workshop, for 
instance, had to be earned up on their own shoulders by his 
apprentices. This wood was to bmld the altar, the government 
hut, and the hospital. The younger of the people’s representa- 
tives, above all Pastor Tomasian and the teachers, were needed 
by Gabriel on the Damlayik, while the General Council, 
under Ter Haigasun, continued its business in the valley. 

At that time there were about five hundred men encamped 
on the Damlayik. With the shock troops and elite, it was a 
question not only of spurring on this work to the exhaustion 
point, but of fanning to higher and higher flame the passionate 
fighting-spirit already in them. When at night with exhausted 
bodies they gathered round the fires in the town enclosure. 
Pastor Aram, in long exhortations — which had, however, 

237 



little of the sermon m them — would explain the real meaning 
of this resistance. He proclaimed the divine right of self' 
defence, spoke of the mysterious way of blood which Arme- 
nians have trodden all through the ages — of the value of this 
one brave attempt, as an example which might fire their whole 
people to resist and so save itself. He described all the cruelty 
of the convoys, all he had himself seen or heard described, 
giving such atrocities as an instance of the way in which these 
thousands of villagers would have been certain to perish in 
the end, and, with equal conviction, he kept assuring them 
that the great deed in which they were united was a certain 
way to freedom and victory. To be sure, he was never very 
explicit as to how they were to gain their victorious liberty. 
Nor did anyone ask him. The very sound of his stormy words 
was enough to fire the blood of the young men; the meanings 
behind them mattered less. 

Sometimes Gabriel spoke instead of the pastor. He was less 
rhetorical, more exact. They must never, he urged them, waste 
a second, cat one unnecessary mouthful; must concentrate 
every pulse-beat on the one aim. Let them think less of m- 
evitablc misfortune than of the sorry pain and degradation 
with which the Turks were befouhng their Armenian sub- 
jects. “If once we manage to drive them down off the moun- 
tain, we shan’t have merely wiped off this insult, we <bail 
have humbled and dishonoured the Turks for ever. Because 
we’re the weak, and they’re the strong. They despise us as a 
set of merchants and always boast of being soldiers. If we 
them once, we shall have poisoned their self-esteem and given 
them a lesson they’ll never get over.” 

Whatever Gabriel and Aram may really have been thrnk* 
ing at this time, they insisted again and again on the glorious 
outcome of resistance, hammering fanatical belief and, more 
important still, fanatical discipline, into young, impressionable 
minds. 

No more than Gabriel had ever been aware that he possessed 

238 



ai) iron constitution, had he suspected his gifts as an organizer. 
In the milieux in which he had so far hved “sound practical 
sense” had always connoted hmited and acquisitive thinking. 
Therefore he had striven all too successfully to be on the side 
of the unpractical. But now, thanks to prdimmary work, he 
succeeded in the first few hours in building up the most feasible 
division of his army into skeleton “cadres,” into which rein- 
forcements from the valley could very easily be incorporated. 
He built up three main divisions: a fighting-formation; a big 
reserve; and a cohort of youth, for all half-grown lads of from 
thirteen to fifteen, only to be used as a last resort in case of 
very heavy losses on a harassed front, but otherwise to act as 
scouts, observation corps, and liaison runners. The full strength 
of this front line of defence worked out at eight hundred and 
sixty men. This, not including the less fit, the totally unfit, 
and a certain number of the most indispensable “experts," 
comprised all the men from sixteen to sixty. All others, elderly 
men stdl able to work and a certain proportion of girb and 
women, were lumped together as reserve — so that his second 
strength was somewhere between a thousand and eleven hun- 
dred. The third branch, the scouting-bngade of his cohort of 
youth, the cavalry of the Damlayik, consisted of over three 
hundred boys. On the second day Gabriel sent his adjutant 
Avakian down to the valley to fetch Stephan. He was not 
certain that juhette would let him go so easily. But the student 
punctually returned with a radiant Stephan at his heels, to 
be enrolled at once as a scout by his father. Of tlie eight hun- 
dred and sixty men of his main defence, it is true that not 
more than three hundred could be armed with what infantry 
rifles they had. Most, unfortunately, had either ordinary 
hunting-guns or the romantic flint-locks to be found in nearly 
every house in the villages. 

Gabriel had ordered every gun from his brother’s chests that 
was in any sort of working order, to be distributed. Luckily 
most of the men, not only those who had served as Turkish 

239 



conscripts, knew how to handle a rifle. Yet, for all that, the 
main defence was lamentably armed. Four platoons of regular 
infantry, even without the usual machine-gun, would have 
been a far superior force. The most essential part of the de- 
fence had naturally not been thought of as one vaguely uni- 
form mass; Gabriel had split it up strategically into definite 
sections of ten men each, that is to say, minute battahons^ 
which could be moved and disposed independently. He had 
also taken care that each of these decads should be composed 
of men of the same village, if possible of the same family, 
so that comradeship might be as strongly cemented as possible. 

The command presented greater difficulties, since one in 
each of these ten must be given authority, just as the bigger 
units must have their commanders. Gabriel chose these leaders 
from among men of various ages who had seen service. Th< 
invaluable Chaush Nurhan undertook the business of genera], 
chief ordnance officer, fortress engineer, and sergeant-major 
all in one. The twisted ends of his grey, wiry moustache 
bristled, the huge Adam’s apple on his stringy throat worked 
up and down Nurhan seemed heartily grateful to the Turks 
for having arranged a few deportauons and so provided his 
opportunity, so passionate was the zeal with which he hurled 
himself on military duties so long forgone. For hours he 
drilled those men who were not at work, without once rest- 
ing or letting them rest. He had the notion, with the help of 
Armenian quick-wittedness, of working in a few days through 
the whole Turkish drill-book, as laid down for an infantry- 
training of several years. His main preoccupations wer< 
fighting-manoeuvres, heads “up” and “down,” quick entrench 
ments, the use of terrain, and storm attack. He was disgusted 
with Bagradian for having forbidden any rifle practice, even 
though It was most understandable, and not merely tc 
save munitions. Elderly as Nurhan was, he raced from one 
drilhng company to the next, mstructing each platoon in- 
structor, shouting and raving in the bluest of barrack-rooir 

240 



Turkish. Armed to the teeth with sword, army revolver, 
rifle, cartridge-belt, he had also slung on the infantry bugle, 
scrounged from a quartermaster’s store, and used its kicking, 
strutting bugle-calls at any instant to rally his men. A startled 
Gabriel hurried the whole long way from the north ridge to 
the drilling-ground to put a firm stop to these reckless tootmgs. 
Was it absolutely necessary, he asked, to give the saptiehs and 
Mohammedan villages of the neighbourhood strident warn* 
iugs of manceuvres on the Daralayik^ 

During the first day all the deserters on Musa D:igh had 
begun to join forces with the garrison. In the couriC of the 
next few days their number increased to the very respectable 
figure of sixty. Nurhan’s bugle seemed to have i allied these 
lads from the hills around, from Ahmer Dagh an 1 the barren 
Jebel el Akra. To Gabriel, although they were well armed, 
they were welcome, yet unwelcome, reinforcements. There 
could be no doubt that this pitiful mob contained not only the 
usual recalcitrants — cowards, bulbed men, haters of discipline 
— but sinister elements, fellows with as much to fear from 
the civil authorities as the military. There were crooks among 
them, who spuriously assumed the deserter’s halo, whose real 
profession was that of foot-pad, who seemed to have come, 
not from any barracks in Antakiya, Aleppo, or Alexandretta, 
but from the jail at Payas. It was hard to distinguish sheep 
from goats in this reinforcement of sixty-odd, since all looked 
equally scared, shy, famished. It was not surprising that they 
should, since day and night they had had to keep a look-out 
for gendarmes and could never venture down into the vil- 
lages before two or three in the morning to beg a crust from 
their scared compatriots. The skeletons of these deserters — 
they could scarcely any longer be said to have bodies — were 
hung with the rags of desert-hued uniforms. What still was 
visible of their faces, imder a matted growth of hair and 
bristle, was tanned almost black with sun and dirt. Their 
Armenian eyes expressed not only the general pain, but with 

241 



it a peculiar agony, the sullen pain of the shady outcast slowly 
unking back to the level of beasts. The pack looked as though 
humanity had cut it off. Only fo the deserter Sarkis Kilikian, 
whom they called “the Russian,” was this inapplicable, out- 
wardly at least, though he of them all seemed the most irrev- 
ocably cut off from the safety of the human family. Gabriel 
recognized him at once as the ghost which had risen that 
night in “Three-Tent Square.” The problem of enrolling these 
sixty vagrants without imperilling the gradually forming dis- 
cipline of the rest was one that could not be solved immedi- 
ately. For the present, in spite of their disillusioned grimaces, 
they were sent to drill under the iron supervision of Chaush 
Nurhan, who made them sweat for their keep through the 
very same drill-book, to avoid which they had escaped More 
essential even than Nurhan’s drilling was the other task of 
these wildly industrious days — the building and digging of 
fortifications The blue and brown lines marked by Gabriel 
on Avakian’s map were being changed into realities. Since 
for the time being the Damlayik had more hands than spades, 
shifts of diggers were formed. Bagradian’s eventual aim was 
to use only ihe reserve for labour — that is to say, the eleven 
hundred men and women who would not be at their posts 
unless there was fighting, and whose task would otherwise 
be all the neeessary work of the camp. But these people were 
still down in the villages. 

By G.'ibriel’s reckoning there were thirteen different points 
at which the Damlayik could be threatened. The most open 
point of attack was in the north, that narrow indentation he 
called the North Saddle, which separated the Damlayik from 
the other portions of Musa Dagh which lay dispersed in the 
Bcilan direction. The second, but far more vulnerable, spot 
was the wide path above Yoghonoluk up through the ilex 
grove. Further danger zones on the western extremities of 
the mountain resembled this in a lesser degree, wherever, in 
fact, the slopes became less steep, and where Hocks and herds- 

242 



men had trodden out a natural track. The only points of 
differentiation were the strong, towering rocks to the south, 
the “South Bastion” of the map, which dominated the broad, 
stony slopes rising out of the plain of the Orontes in abrupt, 
terraced ridges. Down in the plain stood the remnants of a 
fallen human world, the fields of Roman ruins of Seleucia. 
These stony leavings of a civihzation crashed to earth aped 
the southern dank of the mountain, with its tier upon tier of 
heaps of stone. Under Samuel Avakian’s supervision and 
Bagradian’s precise directions two fairly high walls composed 
of great blocks of stone had been put up, not only on this 
rocky incline itself, but right and left of it. The student 
marvelled that such complete walls should be thought neces- 
sary for the mere purposes of cover. H:s strategic insight was 
still very imperfect in those days, and he seldom understood 
his master’s intentions. But the hardest work was that de- 
manded in the north, the most vulnerable point of the de- 
fence. Gabriel Bagradian himself worked at the long trench — 
several hundred paces long — with all its chevrons and supports. 
In the west it was backed by the rocky confusion of the side 
overlooking the sea, which, with all its obstacles, natural 
entrenchments, caverns, formed a labyrinthine fortress. East- 
wards Bagradian strengthened his entrenchments with out- 
posts and tree-entanglements. It was lucky that the greater 
part of this terrain should have been composed of soft soil. 
Yet the spades kept jarring against big blocks of limestone and 
dolomites, which impeded the progress of the work so that 
they could scarcely hope to complete these trenches in less 
than four working days. While muscular diggers, aided by a 
few peasant women, turned up the soil, boys with sickles 
and knives felled the scrubby undergrowth at certain points 
in front of the trench, that the fire-zones might be unimpeded. 
Bagradian stayed there all day, supervising. He kept running 
up to the indentation and the counter-slope of the saddle to 
make sure, from every conceivable angle, that the trench was 

243 



being properly dug. He gave orders that the thrown-up earth 
was always to be flattened into the soil again. His whole aim 
was to assure himself that this wide groove should be fully 
camouflaged, that the thick-shrubbed slope along which it 
ran should seem to be still untouched by human hands. When 
it IS remembered that, aside from the reserve trench in the 
next wave of ground, there were still to be completed twelve 
smaller positions, Bagradian’s stubborn concentration here 
must have filled every intelligent observer with anxiety. 

It was evening. Gabriel lay on the earth exhausted, staring 
at the uncompleted altar-frame, which looked to him dis- 
proportionately high. Then, in his half-sleep, he noticed that 
he himself was being stared at. Sarkis Kilikian, the deserter I 
The man was probably his junior, perhaps scarcely thirty 
years old. Yet he had the sharp, emaciated look of a man of 
fifty. The skin of his face, livid for all its tan, seemed to be 
tightly, thinly stretched over a sardonic skull. His features 
appeared less to be hollowed out by endurance than by life 
Itself, lived to its very last dregs. Sated— satiated with life 
that was the word’ Though his uniform was just as tattered 
as those of the other deserters, it gave an impression of ele- 
gance run wild, or of elegant wildness. This was mainly due 
to the fact that he alone of them all was clean-shaven, and 
shaven freshly and closely. Gabriel felt a chill and sat up. 
He thrust a cigarette at the man Kihkian took it without a 
word, pulled out some kind of barbarous tinder-box, struck 
sparks which, after many vain attempts, at last set light to a 
strip of tow, and began to smoke with a jaded indifference 
which seemed to suggest that Bagradian’s expensive cigarette 
was his usual brand Now they were both staring in silence 
again, Gabriel with increasing discomfort. The Russian never 
turned his indifferent, and yet scornful, eyes away from 
Bagradian’s white hands. 

Gabriel at last could bear it no longer. He stormed: “Well, 
what do you want 


244 



Sarkis Kilikian blew out a thick cloud of smoke, not chang- 
ing one nuance of his expression. The worst of it was that 
he still kept his eyes on Gabriel’s hands. He seemed lost in 
profound reflections upon a world in which such white, un- 
damaged hands could exist. At last he opened his hpless 
mouth, disclosing decayed, blackened teeth. His deep voice 
had less hate in it than his words: “Not the thing for such a 
fine gentleman.” 

Bagradian sprang to his feet. He tried to think of a sharp, 
effective answer. To his deep discomfort he could not And one. 
The Russian, slowly turning his back on him, said, half to 
himself, with a fairly good French accent: “On verra ce 
quon pouira durer.” 

'fhat night, round the campfire, Gabriel made several in- 
quiries about Sarkis Kilikian. The man had been well known 
for several months in the whole district round Musa Dagh. 
He was not one of the local deserters, and yet the saptiehs 
seemed especially eager to track him down. In this connexion 
Shatakhian told Gabriel the Russian’s history. Since, as a 
general thing, the schoolmasters in the seven villages were a 
highly imaginative set, Bagradian almost suspected that 
Shatakhian was piling up horrors of his own invention to 
spice his story. But Chaush Nurhan was sitting beside bun, 
nodding grave assent to every detail. Chaush Nurhan was in 
bad odour in the neighbourhood, as a special patron of deserters 
and the intimate knower of then ways. And he at least was 
not suspiciously imaginative. 

Sarkis Kilikian had been born in Doit Yol, a large village 
in the plain of Issus, north of Alexandretta. Before he had 
quite completed his eleventh year, massacres on the classic 
pattern arranged by Abdul Hamid had broken out in Anatolia 
and Cilicia. They fell out of a cloudless sky. Kilikian’s father 
had been a watchmaker and goldsmith, a quiet little man who 
set great store by civilized living and on having his five chil- 

245 



drca well brought up. Since he was well-to-do, he intended 
Sarkis, his eldest, for a priest, and would have sent him to 
one of the seminaries. On that black day for Dort Yol, Watch- 
maker Kilikian shut his shop early, at midday. But that did 
not help him since, scarcely had he sat down to dinner, when 
a band of roughs came thundering on the shop door. Madame 
Kilikian, a tall, yellow-haired woman from the Caucasus, had 
just brought on the dishes when her white-faced husband left 
the table to unlock his shop again. The few minutes of time- 
less experience that followed this will still be part of Sarkis 
Kihkian’s being for as long as a created soul must remam 
Itself through all migrauons and metamorphoses within the 
umverse. He ran out after his father into the shop, which by 
now was crowded with men. A picturesque storm troop of His 
Majesty the Sultan’s Hamidiyehs. The leader of this band of 
storm troopers was a young man with a rosy face, the son of a 
minor official. The most noticeable things about tins rather 
portly young Turk were the many strange medals and dccora- 
uons strewn here and there about his tunic. Whereas the 
solemn, matter-of-fact Kurds at once proceeded to get down 
to business, carefully emptying out the contents of drawers 
into their bags, this spruce and daundess son of a petty official 
seemed to view his mission in its purely political aspect. His 
loutishly juvenile face glowed with conviction as he bellowed 
at the watchmaker: “You are a usurer and a money-lender. 
All Armenian swine arc usurers and money-lenders. You un- 
clean giaours arc responsible for the wretchedness of our 
people.” 

Master Kilikian pointed quietly to his work-table, with its 
magnifying-glass, pincers, htdc wheels, and springs. “Why do 
you call me a money-lender?” 

“All this here is lies which you use to hide your blood- 
sucking.” 

Their discussion did not get any further, since shots cracked 
out m the low, narrow room. For the first time in his life little 

346 



SarJds smelt the narcotic reek of gunpowder. He did not at 
first m the least understand what had happened as he saw his 
father, bendmg over his table to his work, pull it down on 
to the floor with him. Without a word Sarkis flitted back to 
the parlour. His yellow-haired mother stood drawn up, with 
her back to the wall, not darmg to breathe. Her hands, right 
and left, were clutching her small daughters, two and four 
years old. Her eyes were fixed on the basket-cradle contaimng 
her baby. The seven-year-old Mesrop was scaring greedily at 
the appetizing mutton kebab, which still stood peacefully 
smoking on the table. But when the armed men came crowd- 
ing in on them, Sarkis had already seized the dish and hurled 
it, steaming, in one desperate jerk, straight into the leader’s 
plump, rosy face. That dauntless youth ducked with a howl 
of pain, as though he had been hit by a hand-grenade. Brown 
gravy streamed all down his resplendent tunic. The big, clay 
pitcher followed this first hit, with still better effect. The 
leader’s nose had begun to bleed, but this did not prevent his 
urging on his men in an anguished bellow. Little Sarkis, 
armed with a carving-knife, stood in front of his mother 
to protect her. This imscrable weapon in the hands of a boy 
of eleven was enough to deadc the dauntless Hamidiyehs not 
to let It get as far as a hand-to-hand battle. One of them flung 
himself, swift and cowardly, on to the cradle, snatched out the 
screaming baby, and cracked its skull against the wall. Sarkis 
pressed his face into his mother’s stiffening body. Strange, 
whispering sounds kept forcing their way through her tight- 
pressed lips. And then began the deafening crack and ratde 
of many revolver bullets, all emptied into a woman and four 
children, a salvo which should have been enough to set a 
whole regiment in retreat. The room was thick with fumes, 
the brutes aimed badly. It was of course predestined that not 
one of these bullets should hit Sarkis. The first to die was the 
seven-year-old Mesrop. The bodies of the two little girls hung 
limp in the hands of their mother, who did not let go of 

^7 



them. Her full, round face was rigid and motionless, A 
bullet hit her right arm. Sarkis felt, through his back, the 
short, convulsive movement which she gave. Two more shot* 
pierced her shoulders. She stood erect, still not letting go of 
her children. Only when two more had blown half her face 
away, did she topple forwards, bend over Sarkis, who still 
wanted to keep fast hold of her, pour out her mother’s blood 
upon his hair, and bury him under her body. He lay still, 
under the warm, heavily breathing load of his mother, and 
never stirred. Only four more shots bespattered the wall. 

The pudgy-faced leader felt he had done his duty. “Turkey 
for the Turks! ’’ he crowed, though no one echoed his cry of 
victory. 

While Sarkis lay protected, as in a womb, his senses were 
strangely alert. He could hear voices which made him con- 
clude that the leader was behaving repulsively in a corner. 

“Why arc you doing that’’” someone reproved. “There arc 
dead people here.” 

But this fighter for the national pr.nciple refused to let him- 
self be so balked. “Even as corpses they’ve still got to know 
that we’re the masters, and they’re dirt.” 

A profound quiet had been established before Sarkis, cov- 
ered in blood, dared to creep out from under his mother. 
This movement seemed to bring Madame Kihkian back to 
consciousness. She had no recognizable face left. But the voice 
was hers, and so quiet: ‘Tctch me water, my child.” The 
pitcher was broken. Sarkis stole out with a glass to the court- 
yard fountain. When he got back, she was still breathing 
but could neither drink nor speak again. 

The boy was sent to live with some rich '■elations in 
Alexandretta. In twelve months he seemed to have got over it 
all, though he scarcely ate, and though nobody, not even these 
kindly foster-parents, could get him to say more than the most 
indispensable words. Teacher Shatakhian had precise informa- 
tion about all this, because this same Alexandretta family had 



paid for hu own stay in Switzerland. Later they sent Sark» 
to Ejmiadzin, in Russia, the largest theological college the 
Armenian nation. Pupils of this famous establishment could 
aspire to the very highest offices of the Gregorian church. The 
intellectual drill to which these students had to submit was 
on the whole not so very rigorous. And yet, before the end 
of his third school year, Sarkis. Kihkian, in whom a savage^ 
a diseased, longing for freedom had slowly developed, ran 
away from the seminary. He was almost eighteen when he 
wandered the dirty lanes of Baku, possessed of only his shabby 
seminary cassock and the appetite of several days. It did not 
occur to him to apply to his foster-parents for funds. From the 
day of his flight from Ejmiadzin, these good people lost all 
track of their proteg^. Sarkis Kilikian had now no choice but 
to look for work. He got the only work of which there was 
plenty in Baku, servitude in the huge oil-fields along the bare 
coasts of the Caspian Sea. There, in a very few months, 
through the effects of oil and natural gases, his skin turned 
yellow and shrivelled-looking. His body dried up, like a dead 
tree. Considering his nature and his-hook-learnmg, it is not 
surprising that he should have become involved in the social- 
revolutionary movement, which in those days was beginning 
to take hold of the workers of the Russian Near East: Geor- 
gians, Armenians^ Tatars, Turkomans, and Persians. Though 
the Tsar’s government did its best to egg on these various 
peoples against each other, it did not succeed in breaking 
their solidarity against the oil kings. From year to year strikes 
became more widespread and successful. In one of them Cos- 
sack provocation led to fearful bloodshed. The reply to this 
was the assassination of the district governor, a Prince Galitzin, 
come on a tour of inspection. Among those accused of conspir- 
ing this was Sarkis IGlikian. Almost nothing could be proved 
against him judicially. He had neither made speeches nor 
“worked underground.” No one could give definite evidence 
against him. But “escaped seminarists” were a class apart— it 



SMF the most stubborn agitators. That alooe trai 
Sjdhu strayed, for Mt, into the convict |>rison of Baku. 

He would certainly have died off soon enough in that d^ 
of filth and disease, had fate not had more cunning benefits in 
store for him. The murdered Gahtzm was succeeded by a 
Prince Vorontsov. This new, unmarried governor was later 
joined by his sister, also celibate^ in the government residence 
at Baku. Princess Vorontsova bore her virginity with iron self- 
abnegation. Energetic and full of the best intentions, she was 
in the habit of instituting in every government district to 
which her brother was appointed a unique mission of reform. 
Those who are relentless with themselves are apt to be equally 
so with others, and so in time this exalted lady had developed 
into a veritable sadist of neighbourly love. Her devout eye, 
wherever she might happen to be, was first directed upon the 
prisons. The greatest poets of the Russian land had taught that 
the nearest thing to the kingdom of God is often a den of 
thieves. In the prisons it was usually the young “intellectuals" 
and “pohticals” who aroused her zeal. Along with other 
selected convicts Sarkis Kilikian was now marched off every 
morning to an empty barracks where, in accordance with Irene 
Vorontsova’s curriculum, and under her active cooperation, 
his spiritual healing was briskly attempted. Partly it mn sis rwl 
in strenuous gymnastic exercises, partly in a series of moral 
lectures. The prjpcess saw in this young Armenian the attrac- 
tive child of Satan himself. It was worth while fighting fi>r 
such a soul! So that she herself took a hand in disciplining 
him. When that dried-up satanic body had been broken in by 
several hours of exhausting drill to the bndle-rdn of salvation, 
the soul was led out to grass. To her great delight she was 
soon able to note the amazmg pace at which Kilikian eame 
cantering down the paths of virtue. Her luiurs with this 
taciturn Lucifer produced i{i her, too, a feeling of divine 
illumination. At nights she dreamed of the next &w pages of 
die catechism. And, of course, so apt a pupil must 1^ re- 

350 



mtfdtlii Isim most aad more fecial piivOiq^ 

It began by their taking bun out of irotas and ended by bis 
being moved from prison into a small, emj^y room in bar- 
racks, Unfortunately he did not long make use of his privil^es. 
By the third morning after his removal he had disappeared— 
arid so, by one more bitter experience, ennched Princess 
Vorontsova’s knowledge of how hard it is to light the devil. 

But where can one escape to from the Russian Caucasus? 
To the Turkish Caucasus. It was not a month before Kilikian 
had to admit that he had acted rashly m exchanging Paradise 
for hell. When, half famished, he tried to find a job in 
Erzerum, the police soon had him in charge. Since he had 
neither come up for mspection nor paid his bedel, the local 
magistrate soon condemned him to three years’ hard labour 
as a deserter. Scarcely had a Russian jail released him when a 
Turkish one offered him hospitality. In the jail of Erzerum 
the inscrutable moulder of our destimes put his last touch 
upon Kilikian. He was invested there with that enigmatic 
indifference, sensed by Bagradian in the ghost outside “Three- 
Tent Square,” an “indifference” which the word itself can only 
suggest, without expressing it. They let him out in the last 
months before war was declared. Though the army doctor 
marked him unfit for service, Kilikian was promptly enrolled 
among the recruits of an Erzerum infantry regiment. The life 
he led in it bore some remote resemblance to a human life. 
It also proved that his outwardly weedy body had reserves 
of inexhaustible toughness. And army life, in spite of all its 
restraints, seemed in a way to suit Kihkian. His regiment 
in that first winter of the war did its share in Enver Pasha’s 
memorable Caucasus campaign, in the course of which that 
pretty war god not only used up a whole army corps, but 
was himself almost taken by the Russians. The division which 
covered the staff’s retreat, and so saved Enver’s hberty and 
life, was composed almost entirely of Armenians. It w^s an 
Armenian who bore that Supreme Commander on his bade 

351 ' 



out of the line. (When Sfaatakhian placed Sarkis among 
these Armenians, Gabriel, who suspected him of embellish- 
ment, glanced inquiringly at Chaush Nurhan; but the old 
man n^ded with measured seriousness.) But, whether or no 
Kihkian fought with these brave men, Enver Pasha’s gratitude, 
at least to the whole nation to which Kilikian belonged, had 
soon expressed itself. Scarcely had Private Kilikian’s frost- 
bites begun to heal — scarcely, that is to say, had he moved 
his army blanket from the brick floor of a very congested 
hospital to the brick floor of an equally congested barrack- 
room — when the War Minister’s order was read out to them. 
It thrust all Armenians out of their companies in disgrace, 
disarmed them, degraded them to the rank of inshaat taburi, 
the despised labour battalions. They were herded together 
from every hole and corner, their rifles taken, and they them- 
selves sent in wretched droves south-west, to the hilly neigh- 
bourhood of Urfa. There, starved, and threatened at every 
turn with the bastinado, they were set to work heaving blocks 
of stones for a road that was being built in the Aleppo direc- 
tion. A special order forbade them to protect themselves with 
carrying-wads against the jagged edges of their loads, though 
in the very first grilling hours of work their necks and 
shoulders streamed with blood. Whereas all the rest groaned 
and complained, Sarkis went stumbling in silence from quarry 
to road, road to quarry, as though his body had long ago 
forgotten what pain meant. One day the captain summoned 
all the men of the mshaat taburi, among whom, by chance or 
as a punishment, there happened to be a few Mo hammedans . 
They were told off from the rest. But this unarmed herd of 
Armenians was marched under the escort of an officer about 
an hour’s distance from its quarters into a pleasant valley, 
tapering between two low hills. “Those are the hills of 
Charmelik,’’ an innocent happened to remark, who came from 
these parts and was thankfiil for the day’s freedom. But on 
tihe gentle slopes of this valley more awaited them than thyme 

35a 



snd rosemary, orchids and pimpernels and melissa— strangely 
enough, they found themselves facing an armed platoon. They 
suspected nothing. They were ordered to form up in one long 
rank along the hillside— and still did not suspect. Then, sud- 
denly, without ceremony or preparation of any kind, the 
platoon on their right wing opened fire. Cries filled the air, 
less of fear than boundless amazement. (A woman among 
the listeners here interrupted Teacher Shatakhian: “Can God, 
among His angels, forget those screams?” She began to sob 
and only with difficulty controlled herself.) Sarkis Kilikian 
was clever enough to fall with the others. The bullets zipped 
over him. For the second time he escaped a Turkish death. 
He lay on, among corpses and helplessly dying men, till it 
should be dark. But, long before dusk this flowery valley, 
consecrated to the practical application of Enver Pasha's 
national policy, was visited a second time. The corpse dis- 
mantlers of the neighbourhood were anxious not to waste any 
government property still worn by these “executed” men. 
They had a special eye on sound pairs of army boots. As they 
quietly worked they kept grunting out one of those songs 
inspired by the recent decree of banishment. It began with 
the onomatopoeic line; “Kessc kessc surur yarlara.” — ^“Killing, 
killing, we rout them out.” They came to Kilikian’s boots. 
He kept his legs stiff, almost to cracking-point, to imitate rigor 
mortis. The pilferers tugged — cursed — ^if it had been a little 
harder than it was, they might easily have hacked off his 
feet to save themselves trouble. But at last even these in- 
dustrious fellows departed, with another song on their lips: 
“Hep gitdi, hep bitdil” — ^“All away, all away!” In that night 
Kilikian began his monstrous wanderings. His days were spent 
in many hiding-places; at night he strayed along unknown 
paths, over steppes and marshy ground. He lived on nothing, 
that is to say, on what grew everywhere out of the earth. 
Very seldom did he venture into a hamlet to knock in' the 
dark at the door of an Armenian house. Truly it was proved 

253 



dondit that Sarkis had a devil’s body, suptthhi^Mi^ 
ittong. 'Ihe skeleton cased in leather diat he was maju^lfed 
not to perish on the roads but reached Dort Yol in the first 
days of April. Without caring about the danger Kilikian went 
straight to his father’s house, out of which weeping people had 
led him twenty years ago. The house had remained faithfid 
to his father’s trade; a watchmaker and goldsmith was living 
in it. The well-known sounds of filing and tapping came from 
the shop. Sarkis went in. The frightened watchmaker was 
already trying to hustle hiiri out when he gave his name, 
whereupon the new owner consulted his family. The deserter 
got a bed in the same parlour where the horror had been. 
After twenty years there were still bullet-marks on the wall. 
Kihkian stayed two days in this place of refuge. Meanwhile 
the watchmaker had procured hun a rifle and some cartridges. 
When they asked if there was anything else they could do for 
him, he begged only to be given a razor, before vanishing 
through the dark again. A few mghts later he met two other 
deserters, in the village of Gomaidan. They seemed reliable 
imd experienced in the ways of life. They recommended Musa 
Dagh as a good and safe place on which to hide. 

That is the story of Sarkis Kilikian, “the Russian,’’ as it 
emerged from Teacher Shatakhian’s account, Chaush Nur- 
han’s assenting silences, and the occasional comments and ad- 
ditions of other listeners, and as it was formed and reflected 
in Bagradian’s sensitive mind. The European could Only 
marvel and be aghast at the fateful burden of such a destiny 
and at the strength which had not broken down under it. 
But this respect was tinged with horror and the desire to see 
as little as possible of this victim of jails and barrack-squares. 
That night, after long consultation with Chaush Nurhan, 
Gabriel decided to assign the Rusrian and the other deserters 
to the defence of the “South Bastion.” It was the strongest 
part of his whole defence, and also the farthest from camjh 


254 



Om aorfiiag dl tveoc badcto tlie Otdjr 

a few idepdidable sentries staj^ on the Damlayik with the 
stores and munitions. Ter Haigasun himself had given the 
order. The saptiehs, come to look for arms, must find no empty 
or half-empty houses. Any noticeable absence of young men 
could have masked neither by Pastor Nokhudian’s band 
of the devout in Bitias nor by a part of the people left in the 
valley for that purpose. Bagradian had expected the priest to 
give this order. Perhaps it had also an educational intention 
concealed in it. The young men of Musa Dagh, who so far 
knew of atroaties only by hearsay, must now come face to 
face with the living reality; their subsequent fight must be 
to the last point of desperation. 

At the exact hour foretold by Ah Nassif the saptiehs entered 
Yoghonoluk, about a hundred strong. There was obvious con- 
tempt in this. The authorities had sent a handful of men to 
clear a considerable district. The Armenian sheep would be 
cert ain not to put up a fight when led to the slaughter. The 
few instances to the contrary, so welcome to the government, 
proved nothing. How could a weak, mercantile people hope 
to stand up to the warrior race? The answer to this question 
was the hundred gendarmes detailed for Yoghonoluk. But 
these were no longer stout assassins in the genre of Abdul 
Hamid. No more trusty, pock-marked faces, whose loyally 
menacing wink had often indicated that a quid pro quo 
would make them easier to deal with. Now it was plain, in- 
human cruelty — quite single-minded. These saptiehs did not, 
like their predecessors, wear lousy lambskin bonnets, nor the 
trumped-up uniforms, composed of a tunic and nondescript 
mufti, of the good old days. They were all clothed in the 
same yellowish-brown field uniform rccendy issued. Round 
their heads, in the manner of bedouins, they had bound the 
long^ trailing sun- and sweat-doths, which gave them an 
unmistakable aspect of Egyptian sphinxes. They arrived in 
regular formation, not marching perhaps with the true 

255 



mechanical step of the West, but still, no longer in the un> 
even xoU of the East. Ittihad had exercised its power even on 
these Antioch saptiehs, so far from Istanbul. The sporadic 
flames of religious hatred and fanaticism had been skilfully 
fanned to the cold, steady flare of nationahsm. The deportation 
squad was commanded by the muafin, the pohcc chief of 
Antioch. The young mudir with the pink, lashlcss eyes and 
freckled hands came with it. The men, whose arrival had long 
been heralded, came swmging at midday into the church 
square of Yoghonoluk. Strident Turkish bugle-calls resounded, 
and drums were tapped. But in spite of these commanding 
admonitions, the Armemans still remained indoors. Ter 
Haigasun had issued the strictest orders to all seven villages 
that people must show themselves as little as possible, must 
avoid all crowding together, and walk into no provocative 
traps. The mudir read out his long decree of banishment to 
a public consisting of saptiehs, a number of stragglers with the 
troops, and the closed windows of the church square. This 
order was at the same time posted up in several places on 
the church walls, on the council house, and on the school 
building. After which administrative measure the saptieh^ 
since now it was dinner-time, encamped where they stood, lit 
Arcs, and began to cook up their kettles of fuhl, broad beans 
with mutton fat. Then, squatung and chewing, as with flat 
cakes of bread they scooped up their portion of the stew, 
they looked round them idly. What well-built houses* And 
all made of stone, with firm roofs and carved wooden veran- 
das! Rich people, these Armenians — rich everywhere! At 
home in their own villages they were thankful when the roofs 
of their hovels, black with age, did not give way under the 
many storks’ nests. And the church of these unclean pigs 
was as massive and imposing as a fort — ^with all its angles 
and buttresses. Ah, well, Allah was about to pay them back 
something for their pride! They’ve had a finger in everything, 
haven’t they— governed in Istanbul, raked in the money like 

256 



a harvest. Other people had had to put up with anything; till 
at last even the sleepiest patience gave out. Not even the 
mudir and the muahn could conceal their interest in the 
splendours of this village square. Perhaps, for the space of 
half a second the police chief felt the insecurity of a barbarian 
con&onted with a superior civilization. But then he boiled 
with redoubled hatred, remembering Talaat Bey’s famous 
words, quoted again by the Kaimakam as they mustered to 
set out: “Either they disappear, or we do.” 

The quiet, which m spite of many soldiers lay over this 
square, was odd and unnatural. Nor was it broken perceptibly 
by the presence of a certain number of roughs, who had 
joined the saptiehs on their way. The off-scourings of Antakiya 
and the bigger villages on its outskirts poured their dregs into 
the valley of seven villages. On bare, dirt<aked feet the scum 
came pattering— ffom Mengulye, Hamblas, and Bostan. From 
Tumama, Shahsini, Ain Yerab, and, further still, from Bded 
es Sheikh. Eyes of unbridled covetousness darted up and down 
the houses. Arab peasants from the EUAkra mountains in the 
south waited, quietly squatung on their heels, on the fat 
event. Even a little group of Ansariyes had come along — ^the 
lowest pariahs of the prophet, nationless half-Arab mobs of 
underhngs, waiting to make the most of this rare chance of 
feeling superior to somebody. There were also a few Mohajirs, 
even now; war refugees sent by the government to the interior 
and invited cordially to indemnify themselves with Armenian 
property. And, with such simple plebeians, strange to relate, a 
ring of heavily veiled ladies, in a half-circle of glowing timid- 
ity. There could be no doubt that they came of the better 
classes It could be seen by a glance at the costly material of 
the cloaks drawn down over their faces, the texture of their 
veils, the tiny mules or lacquered slippers which embellished 
their braceleted feet. These women were the avid clients of 
the bargain sale about to begin, and they waited impatiently. 
For weeks the whisper had gone the rounds of the women’s 

*57 



quartets t>£ Suedia aad ^ Eskel: liaveaV you 

Tliese Christians have the most miUreUous things in riirir 
houses, things we’ve never so much as heard of— far too ex- 
pensive to buy.” — ^“Have you ever been inside an Armenian 
'house, dear?”— “I? No. But the m ..lah’s wife has been telling 
me all about it. You’ll find cupboards and cabmets with litde 
towers on the top of them and pillars and crowns. And you’ll 
find very few sleeping-mats of the kind you lock away in the 
daytime;, but lots of real beds with carved fioivers and for- 
bidden carved children’s heads on them, beds for husband 
and wife as big as a wall’s carriage. You’ll find clocks with 
gold eagles sittmg on them, or cuckoos jumping out of their 
insides and caUing.” — ^“WcU, there’s another proof that they’re 
traitors, otherwise how could they ever get furniture from 
Europe?” But it was just such household gear as this that so 
powerfully attracted these ladies, to whom beautifully wrought 
brass dishes, woven carpets, and copper braziers meant nothing. 

The weird stilbess was suddenly broken. The police chi^ 
for some time eager for a victim, had tbown himself on a 
villager imprudent enough to come to his house door. The 
man was ^ust bto the middle of the square. This police 
constable’s face was characterized by two entirely different 
eyes. His right eye was large and staring, the left little and 
nearly closed up. His military moustache might threaten as 
fieredy as it liked, bs dun protrude itself as murderously — 
his unequal eyes condemned this police chief to a role of 
ferodous comicality, of comic ferocity. Since he was always 
consdous of this defect, his fear of making himself ridicubus 
caused him to exaggerate the authoritative side of bs person- 
aUty. Therefore, though already by nature a bully, he had also 
to play the bully’s part His staring eye did its best to roll, as 
he bellowed at the captured villager: 

“What’s your priest called? What’s the name of your 
mukhtar?” 

The villager whispered an answer. The next mmute a hon- 

asS 



dtedinicei vnne shoadsg acTOM (lie aqtu^ 

Ccane out o£ your himjog'placel Q^e on out, 

Out with you, Haigasun and Kd>ussyanl*' 

Ter Haigasun had awaited the sununons inside the church. 
"Afier the holiday mass, without having taken off his vestments^ 
he had remain^ before the altar with his deacons. 

He intended to face the saptiehs in the glamour and sublimity 
of his ofSce. This intention was entirely characteristic. There 
was more in it than an empty gesture of ceremony, there was 
a keenly psychological object. Every Oriental is filled with 
sensations of holy awe by ceremonious pageantry and the 
splendour of religious vestments. Ter Haigasun reckoned that 
his appearance as a fully vested priest would mitigate the 
saptiehs’ brutality. Slowly, in purple and gold, he emerged 
from the doorway of his church. On his head sparkled the tall 
Gregorian mitre, in his right hand he bore the doctor’s wand 
of the Armenian rite. And in fact this consecrated figure 
served to dampen the spirits of the police chief, whose brutal 
voice lost some of its certainty. 

“You’re the priest. You’ll be answerable to me for everything 
that happens. Everything! You understand?” 

Ter Haigasun inclined his bloodless face in answer. In the 
strong sunlight it looked hke carved amber. He bowed his 
head and did not answer. The head constable felt himself in 
danger of being polite— that is to say, of becoming slack. His 
left, swollen eye had started to twitch. These two sensations 
filled him with rising irritation. It was high time to remind 
the mudir, his saptiehs, and this priest of his own pulverizing 
authority. So with clenched fists be bore down on Ter Haiga> 
sun but found that he had to halt in an uneasy posture of 
respect. All the more, therefore, did his voice fed obliged to 
spread consternation, the due efiect of his own authoritative 
person. 

“You’ll ddiver up all your weapons— all of them! You 
understand? You can look like a bazaar juggler all you want, 

359 



but you're personally responsible £i» every kni£e there is in the 

ymage.” 

“Wc have no weapons in the village.” 

This was perfectly true. Ter Haigasun spoke very quiedy 
and steadily. Meanwhile, in the dark hallway of the mukhtar’s 
house, there was in progress a minor tragi-comedy, which 
ended when the old village clerk with the sly goatee came fly- 
ing out of the door, which quickly slammed after him. In 
this primitive fashion did Mukhtar Kebussyan, at this, the 
most difficult juncture of his mayoralty, appoint his clerk to 
represent him. The luckless pseudo-mukhtar, white as chalk, 
came stumbhng into the arms of the saptiehs, who thrust him 
forwards to their leader. 

The clerk babbled an echo of Ter Haigasun: “We’ve got no 
weapons in the village.” 

The head constable was greatly relieved by the sight of this 
trembling, stuttering mukhtar. It fully re-established his own 
thunderous divinity. He snatched a leather whip out of the 
hand of the nearest saptieh and swished the air with it. “All 
the worse for you if you’ve got no weapons.” 

Here, for the first time, the red-haired mudu* took a hand. 
This young man from Salomka was anxious to show the Chris- 
tian priest what a world of difference there existed between 
his hke and a loutish police chief of the worst provincial 
variety. Ittihad did not stand for out-of-date massacres. Ittihad’s 
methods were of the subdest. Ittihad, with iron resoludon, 
gave irresistible effect to the necessary raison d’6tat, while en- 
deavouring, in so far as this could be managed, to avoid 
superfluous harshness. Ituhad was so modern. It disliked the 
crude blood-baths of former days; it was in fact quite proud 
of possessing “nerves.” All of which inspired the young mudir 
to a glance at his beaudfully red-dnged finger-nails b^re he 
turned towards Ter Haigasun, full of that dangerous amia- 
bility which all official persons invested with the powers of 
Ufe and death know how to use so tellingly. 

ado 



Tou know what we’ve decided to do with you?” 

'The priest looked him steadily in the fac^ sdH not 
answering. 

The mudir, a trifle disconcerted, waved at a placard. “The 
government has decided to migrate you. You’re to be allotted 
other territory.” 

“And where is the other territory situated?” 

“That’s neither your affair nor mine. My only business it 
to collect you, and yours is simply to march.” 

“And when must we leave?” 

“It will depend on how you behave how much time I give 
you to get your belongings into order and make yourselves 
ready to march according to exact stipulations.” 

The village clerk had by now managed to control himself. 
He asked in a voice of expectant humility: “And what are 
we allowed to take with us, Effendi?” 

“Only what each individual can carry for himself on his 
back, or in his hand. All the rest, your fields, gardens, landed 
property, your houses, with all such movable and immovable 
furniture as belongs to them, goes to the state, by ministerial 
decree of the fifteenth of Nisan of the present year. The Migra- 
tion Law of Mayis the fifth provides that you be allotted fresh 
holdings of ground in exchange for what you have vacated. 
Every holder to produce the registered extent of his property, 
to obtain a legal substitute from the government. Such a docu- 
ment must bear 'stamps to the value of five piastres. These 
stamps are obtainable at the district police headquarters.” 

This official chant came forth so mildly and melodiously 
from the lips of this young, carroty mudir that it sounded like 
some regulation for fruit-growers. The benevolent mudir raised 
his forefinger. “It will be best for you all to create as little 
disturbance as possible — ^not to destroy any property, but to 
hand it over entire, just as it is, to the state.” 

Ter Haigasun opened his hands and spread them out 
towards the diplomatic young man from Salonika. “We don’t 

261 



keep aoydung; Mudir. Wkat good traold it be 
Take whatever you find. Our doors are open.” 

The mudir’s smooth tone had begun to rile the head coo* 
stable. It was undermining his authority. After aS, in the last 
resort, he was the head of this expedition, and this quiU-driver 
a mere accessory person sent by the Kaimakam. If he let this 
mealy-mouthed clerk go on much longer, everyone would 
cease to believe that he was chief of police of the town of 
Antaluya. He opened the staring eye a little wider, with 
bloodshot, buffalo ferocity, came two steps nearer Ter Haiga- 
sun, and seized him by the thickly embroidered stole. “Now 
you’ll get together six hundred rifles and have them piled up 
here h^ore me!” 

Ter Haigasun stared a long while at the place where the 
rifles were to be stacked. Suddenly he took a step backwards, 
with a violent jerk which almost overturned the head con> 
stable. "I’ve already told you that there aren’t any rifles in 
the villages.’’ 

The miidir smiled. It was his turn now to get what they 
wanted, without any shouting and rolling of eyes, by sheer 
astute political methods. His voice had a kind, thoughtful note 
in it, as though he were trying to give the Armenian his 
excuse. “How long have you been head-priest in the village, 
if you’ll forgive my question. Ter Haigasun?” 

The vague benevolence of this put Ter Haigasun on the 
alert. He answered sofdy: “About fifteen years next autumn, 
after the vintage.” 

“Fifteen years? Wait. So, in the year of the great revolution, 
you’d been just right years in Yoghonoluk. Now try and 
remember. Didn’t you receive some chests of ilfles in that 
year, allotted you to do your share in the struggle against the 
old government?” 

The mudir asked this by sheer intuition; he had only been 
in ofiBce since the war broke out. He supposed inductively that 
Mhad would have sought the same allies in Syria as in 

261 



Macedai^ am) AiettoGa. Hs £4 a&t len>w be lik tlie maik. 
Ter Haigasua turned his head to bis acolyte^ who bad ttiU not 
dared to come down the church steps, lliis quick movem^ 
beckoned the other priest as witness. Terhisps your priests 
may have to do with weapons, Mudir. That is not the case 
with us.” 

At this dangerotis juncture the village clerk began to whine: 
"But we’ve always lived here in peace. This has been our 
country for thousands of years.” 

Ter Haigasua stared ahuntly at the mudir. He seemed to 
be trying hard to remember. “You’re right, Mudir! The new 
government did distnbute arms at about that time, in various 
places all over the empire — even to Armenians. If you’re old 
enough, you’ll also recollect that all communes receiving them 
had to give a written acknowledgment when they arrived. The 
Kaimakam, who was a miidir like yourself in those days, 
organized the distribution. He’ll be sure to have kept all die 
receipts—one doesn’t throw away an important dorament of 
that kind. Well, I don’t suppose if there’d been any weapons 
in the villages, he’d have sent you to us without the receipt 
for them.” 

This was undeniable. And it was true that in the last few 
days the Record Office of Antakiya had been turned upside 
down to find such receipts. Most of the nahiyehs had de> 
livered them — only the Nahiyeh of Suedia and the surround- 
ing district seemed really to have been sent no weapons in 
1908. The Kaimakam certainly declared that he seemed to 
remember the contrary but could give no proof of it. So that 
Ter Haigasun had quietly found ^e right way out. 

The conviction he displayed envenomed the pleasantly dip* 
lomatic smiles of the mudir, whose voice became 
“What’s a written receipt? A mere scribble. What does that 
prove, after all these years?” 

Ter Haigasun waved an indiffierent hand. “If you don’t be* 
fieve us, look and see for yourselves.” 

263 



The pohce chief, eager to put an end to this long, superfluous 
discussion, brought down his whip with a swish on the priest’s 
shoulders. “Yes, we’ll look all right, you son of a bitch. But 
you two are under arrest, you and the mukhtar. I can do 
what 1 like with you. Your lives are at my sole discretion. 
If we find any weapons, you’ll be nailed up on the door of 
your church. If we don’t. I’ll have you roasted over a fire.” 

The saptiehs bound Ter Haigasun and the clerk. The mudir 
took out a little nail file and got busy on his exquisite fingers. 
This scraping and polishing worked like a gesture of regret 
at the necessary harshness of government measures, the indi- 
cation that he, a civil servant, had nothing at all to do with 
the armed executive. That, however, did not prevent his giving 
a bored hint to the policeman. 

“Don’t forget the churchyard. That’s a very favourite 
hiding-place for munitions.” 

Having said so much, he turned off for a httle constitutional, 
down the village street, leaving all the rest to the skew-eyed 
muafin. At a word from that ferocious commander the 
saptiehs split up into httle groups. A few remained to guard 
the prisoners. Ter Haigasun was made to sit on the church 
steps in his heavily embroidered vestments. Meanwhile, with 
wild vociferations, the saptiehs began to invade surrounding 
houses. From behind the walls came the instant dm of crack- 
ing furniture, splintering glass; windows flew open. Rugs, 
blankets, cushions, mats, straw chairs, icons, and all the 
numerous other articles of household gear came whizzing 
down — ^to be surrounded at once by the looting populace. 
More fragile objects came out after them — oil-lamps, looking- 
glasses, shades, pitchers, jugs, crockery, which smashed under 
a chorus of regretful yammering from the eager bargain- 
basement ladies. All the same they grabbed up the fragments 
and bundled them together in their charshaffes. This din 
and devastation crept round the square, from house to house, 
before it continued along the village street. For three horrible 

364 



hours the two bound men crouched on the steps, before the 
saptiehs returned from their expedition. Its results were worse 
than disappointmg— two old blunderbusses, five rusty sabres, 
thirty-seven sheathed knives, which really were no more than 
prumng-kmves or large-sized penknives. The saptiehs, either 
because they had no spades, or were too lazy to have used 
them, had refrained from desecrating the churchyard. The 
police chief bellowed and raved. This cunning swme of a 
pnest had cheated him of a report which ought to have bristled 
with arms. What a setback for the Antakiya police! Ter Haiga- 
sun was jerked to his feet again. The staring and the swollen 
eye both glowered on him. The breath that came puffing in his 
face stank of hate and ill-digested mutton fat. He turned 
his head, with a Lttle grimace of disgust. In the next mstant 
two blows with the hard hutt of a leather whip had caught 
him full across the check. 

For a few seconds the priest lost consciousness, swayed, 
came awake agam, stood amazed, waiting for the blood to 
flow. At last it gushed out of his nose and moutL A strange 
almost blissful sensauon possessed him as he stood there, bend- 
ing his head far forward, that his poor blood might not stain 
the garment of Christ’s priest, ^me distant angehc voice 
seemed to say in his mind: “This blood is good blood.” 

And it was, in effect, good blood, since the sight of it made 
a certain impression on the young mudir from Salonika, just 
back from his afternoon siesta. He was a fiery advocate of 
extermination but did not like to have to witness it personally. 
Ittihad, in this mudir, had by no means its most relentless 
exponent. He struck a balance, avoiding any display of senti- 
mentality. Time pressed. There were six more villages to visit. 
And, since even the muafin had stilled the itch to assert his 
position and prove his authority, he waved magnanimously. 
The priest and clerk were set free. They were sent home. So 
that, in Yoghonoluk, the day had passed off smoothly enough, 
far more smoothly than sudi days usually did, in these towns 

265 



And Tillages. Only two men, wbo made soma abtOW Ot muttag' 
domiciliary inspection, were shot in the process— only two 
young girls got raped by die saptiehs. 

Gabriel Bagradian had to wait a full twenty-four hours be^ 
fore it became the turn of himself and his house. Once again 
they sat up all ni^t. Exhaustion forced its way through their 
limbs, like a soft mass, stiffening slowly. The many inhabitants 
of the villa— Juliette, Iskuhi, Hovsannah, Gonzague Maris, 
who had recendy taken up his quarters there — ^kept dropping 
ofE to sleep for minutes together, where they sat. This vigil 
was entirely aimless, since the saptiehs* visit was not expected 
before next morning, nor indeed even before midday. Yet no- 
body thought of leaving the others and lying down. Bed — 
that soft kingdom of pillows, that cool security protected by 
its draped mosquito-net, that loving mother, protector of the 
civilized human being— how remote it seemed, even now! 
They had lost their right to such oblivion. When, early next 
mormng, the cook Hovhannes sent fresh coffee, eggs, cold 
chicken, on fine porcelain dishes, into the dining-room, they 
were almost uneasy in spite of their hunger and thirst. They 
ate quickly, as if the house might fall about their ears before 
they had finished. Had they still any right to eat up such good 
things m the old way, without a thought? Surely it was un- 
wise to encroach on the provisions of the Damlayik. All their 
thoughts were centred on Musa Dagh. Gabriel had on bis 
Turkish officer’s uniform. He was wearing his sword and 
medals. He would receive these saptiehs as their superior. 

Gonzague Maris advised most strongly against it: ‘Tour 
nulitary fancy dress will only get on their nerves. I don’t think 
it’ll be to your advantage.” 

Gabriel was unmoved: ‘Tm an Ottoman officer. I’ve duly 
reported at my regiment, and so far no one has degraded me.” 

‘That’ll be done soon enough.” 

So Maris spoke, but his thought added: ‘‘There’s nothing 

266 



. CMi do iar tisese Armeoiaas. Thcy^te soIcttiti bmaticr-^ 
ilways wiQ be.” 

At .about eleven that morning Iskuhi suddenly cdlapsed. 
First a brief faint, then uncontrollable shivering. She dragged 
herself out of the room, insistently refusing any help. Juliette 
wanted to go after her, but Hovsannah rais^ a warning hand. 

"Let her be. . . . It’s Zeitun. . . . She’s terrified. . . . She 
wants to hide. We’re having to go through it all a second 
time.” And the pastor’s young wife hid her face in her hands, 
her heavy body shaken with sobs. 

This was about the moment at which the police squad, the 
muafin and the mudir turned into the grounds of Villa Ba* 
gradian. The sentries posted by Gabriel came breathlessly 
scurrying to announce them. Six saptiehs were placed outside 
the doors of the garden wall, six more in the garden, six in the 
stable-yard. The mudir, the muafin, and four men came into 
the house. The Turks looked fagged. In the last twenty-four 
hours they had played havoc in the villages, looting and 
breaking up the insides of houses, arresting men and dhrash- 
ing them till they bled, they had done a little rapmg, and so 
in part actually realized the festive programme arranged for 
them by the government. Luckily, therefore, their thirst for 
action was somewhat slaked. This huge Bagradian family 
mansion, with its thick walls, cool rooms, full of strange- 
looking furniture, its silencing carpets, acted no doubt as a 
kind of restraint. The red window curtains of the selamlik had 
been drawn. Intruders into the rich dusk of the room found 
themselves in the midst of what looked like an august gather- 
ing of European ladies and gendemen, respectfully surrounded 
by their servants. This impressive company waited stiffly and 
never moved. Juliette kept fast hold of Stephan’s hand. Only 
Gonzague lit a cigarette. Gabriel came a step nearer the 
committee his sword caught up, in prescribed officer’s fanbinn, 
in his left hand.The field-uniform, which he had had in 
Beirut before he left, made him look taller. He was certainly 

267 



the foremost maa ia the room, and this quite apart from his 
inches. Gonzague seemed to have been wrong. The uniform 
was having its effect. The policx chief glanced uneasily at this 
officer with the row of medals on his tunic. The fierce eye 
clouded with melancholy, the half-shut one closed up alto- 
gether. Nor did the freckled mudir seem altogether happy 
in his part. It had been far easier to be a convincingly watch- 
ful providence in the stuffy rooms of wood<arvcrs, silk- 
weavers. Here in these civihzed surroundings the delicate 
nerves of Salonika were proving a handicap. Instead of striding 
pitilessly on to take possession of this cursed house in the 
name of his race, of Ittihad, of the state, the young gentleman 
nodded and clutched at his fez. He began uncomfortably to 
remember a certain talk with Bagradian in his office. His 
moral conflict caused delay and prevented his finding the right 
opemng. Gabriel watched him with such contemptuous 
gravity that really the tables seemed almost turned — ^it was as 
though a tall, war-like Armenia were facing a red-haired, 
cringing, half-breed Turkey. Bagradian seemed to grow and 
grow, as the mudir suffered under his dwarfishness, which so 
inadequately embodied the heroic quality of his race. In the 
end he could manage to do nothing but produce a vast official 
document, against which, so to speak, to steady himself, and 
rap out his business as brusquely as possible. 

“Gabriel Bagradian, born Yoghonoluk? You are the owner 
of this house, the head of this family ? As an Ottoman subject 
you are liable to the decrees and enactments of the Kaima- 
kam of Antioch. You, together with the rest of the population 
of this nahiyeh, from Suedia to Musa Dagh, are ordered to set 
out eastwards, on a day shortly to be specified. Your entire 
family to go with you. You have no right to raise objections 
of any kind against the general order of migration— -neither 
as concerns your own person, nor those of your wife and 
children, nor for any other member of your establish- 
ment. . . .” 


268 



The mudir so far had behaved as though he were reading 
an incantation; now he squinted up, over the document. 
“I am to draw your attention to the fact that your name is 
on the hst of political suspects. You are closely connected with 
the Dashnakzagan party. Therefore, even on the convoy, you 
are to be subjected to dose daily inspection. Any attempt at 
escape, any insubordination against government or executive 
orders, or infrmgement of transport discipline, will render, not 
only you, but your relauves, liable to instant execuuon.” 

Gabriel seemed about to reply. The mudir refused to let 
him speak. His stilted and involved official phrasing, in such 
contrast to the usual floweriness of the East, seemed to inflate 
him with satisfaction. 

“By extraordinary edict of His Excellency, the Wall of 
Aleppo: Armemans on the march are not permitted to make 
use of such conveyances, sumpter or saddle animals as they 
may think flt. In certain exceptional cases leave may be ob- 
tained to make use of any customary vehicle of the country- 
side, or of an ass, for the weak and aihng. Have you any 
requests for such special treatment?” 

Gabriel pressed his sword-hilt against his thigh. The words 
dropped like stones from his lips: “I shall go the way of my 
whole people.” 

By now the mudir had entirely shed his first embarrassment. 
He could put some suave concern into his tone. “So as not to 
expose you to the dangerous temptation of either trying to 
absent yourself, or, later, of leaving the convoy— I hereby take 
possession of your horses, your carriage, and all other beasts 
of transport.” 

Then came the usual procedure, but slightly modified. The 
police chief was still not quite sure how to d^ with the uni- 
form, sword, and medals of this prospective deportee. He 
growled out the usual question about arms. Gabriel sent Kris- 
taphor and Missak to fetch in the long-barrelled Bedouin flint- 
locks hung up as ornament in his h^. (This had of course 

369 



teea furaoged; all die useful weapons in die house wcste-hjl 
now safely on the Damlayik.) Scornful laughter buUiled'aoc 
of the police chief, as out of a ketde on the boil. 

The mudir thoughtfully tapped these romandc flintlodcs. 
Tou surely aren’t going to tell me, Effendi, that you live here 
in this solitude without weapons?” 

Gabriel Bagradian sought ^e lashless stare of the mudir and 
held it steadily. “Why not? This is the first time my house has 
been broken into since it was built in 1870.” 

The freckled one shrugged regretful shoulders. Such recal- 
citrance made it impossible to do anything to mitigate Bagrad- 
ian’s fate. And so, much against his will, he was forced to 
leave the field clear for the sharper process of armed authority. 
The house to be searched for arms! The muafin metaphorically 
rolled up his sleeves, though the officer’s uniform worn 1^ 
this outcast still troubled his sergeant-major’s mind, filling him 
with a puzzled irritation. The staring right eye could not do* 
tach itself from the medals on Bagradian’s chest; apparently 
the chap had served with distinction. It was quite impossiUe 
to deade how this deportee ought to be handled by an Im- 
perial Ottoman employee. To hide these irritable doubts he 
conducted the search with as much din and pother as he 
could — ^went stumping at the head of his sapti^s, with the 
mudir close upon their heels yet still refusing to be involved. 
Gabriel, Avakian, and Kristaphor followed, llie Turks nosed 
in every corner, knocked on the walls, overturned the furni- 
ture, smashed whatever was breakable. Yet it was easy to see 
that this vandalism, perpetrated as a matter of course^ as if by 
mistake, hurt their self-esteem. They were used to making a 
straight, clean job of it. But now their method of smashing 
bottles in the cdlar, with their rifle-butts, was most perfunctory. 
Nor was there any real brio in their method of dealing wi^ 
whatever flasks, jugs, dishes, wine-jars they found. (The most 
important provisions had all been removed.) And these dis- 
illusioned saptiehs had expected a better cellar in such a palace. 



these sme all they codd find, they took away a coi^k 
o£ empty petrol-tins, on which glittering toys the Oriental sets 
great store. Then, sweating and disgruntled, the warriors took 
the staircase by assault and began to rummage the upper 
story. Here they did most in Juliette’s bedroom and dressing- 
room, the scents of which had attracted them so sharply from 
a distance that the other rooms were entirely forgotten. The 
big wardrobe was prised open. Dirty brown fists snatched last 
year’s Paris models off their pegs— frocks like the softest petals, 
which now lay strewn in crumpled twists and heaps about 
the floor. A particularly evil-looking gendarme' pawed them 
with both feet, like a stolidly rampaging bull, as though set 
on stamping these European reptiles into earth. Night-dresses, 
batiste underwear, shifts, and stockings met the same fate. 
The sight of these intimate garments was too much for the 
police chief. He plunged both hands into the white and rose- 
coloured foam and buried his punchinello face in it. The 
rniidir, to indicate the fact that the legislature had nothing in 
common with the executive, went dreamily over to the win- 
dow to look at the garden. An especially zealous saptieh had 
flung himself on the untouched bed and was engaged, since he 
could think of no other method, in tearing open the pillows 
with his teeth. Perhaps there was a bomb among the feathers. 
There was always so much talk of Armenian bombs. Another 
swung his club over the washing-stand. Crystal flasks, bowls, 
powder boxes, saucers, came smashing down, giving out wave 
on wave of heady perfume. 

Gabriel equably watched this desecration. Poor Juliette. . . . 
But what was this by comparison with the next hours, dajrs, 
weeks? He felt deeply troubled. He remembered Iskuhi, creep- 
ing away to hide in her bed. She was nothing to him— and yet 
he pitied her most of all. These beasts had crippled her, and 
she had to face this horror a second time. Bagradian tried to 
diink of a method for getting the muafin and saptiehs part 
Iskuhi's door. 


ayi 



And, indeed, heaven seemed well disposed. Iskuhi, who had 
crept under the sheets, heard the trampling steps and rumbling 
voices of the worst of all deaths come closer and closer. She 
stretched herself out stiff and covered her lap with her right 
hand, while she ceased to breathe, and the ravaged, kaleido- 
scopic face bent nearer and nearer over hers. But this ravager 
only snuiHed her for a second and vanished. Outside, the steps 
clumped on past her door, the voices rumbled farther and far- 
ther off; they seemed to be going downstairs again. Then she 
heard them dimly on the ground floor. Sudden, perfect quiet. 
Had they gone.^ Iskuhi sprang out of bed. To the door on 
her stocking feet. She pushed open a chink of it. Christ 
Saviour, were they really gone? She almost fell back into the 
room again as she heard the cracking of a lash. . . . Voices — 
men’s voices raised. She recognized Gabriel’s among them. 
Holding her lame arm tight, that it might not hinder her, she 
dashed to the staircase. Below, the following had occurred. 

Thinking that now the worst was over, Gabriel had point- 
edly stopped in the hall. He had said to the mudu: “You see, 
we’ve got nothing hidden. Anything else?” 

That freckled political idealist had done his duty. He had 
seen to it that the Armenian effendi and his family should 
at least not escape the Turkish government. The Kaimakam’s 
special instructions concerning Bagradian had been to the 
effect that he was to march with the first convoy, under drastic 
supervision, to Antakiya, where that district authority in per- 
son, as he himself put it, would “take a squint at them.” In the 
mudir’s view this ended official proceedings. Such illustrious 
victims ought not to be goaded too soon to desperation. Far 
better to give them a certain confidence in the government’s 
inscrutable designs, while intensifying, little by httle, the 
sharpness of what they would have to experience. Today ought 
to be mild — preliminary. So again the mudir hesitated, trying 
to think out effective exits, scrutinizing his beautiful finger- 
nails. Unluckily he had reckoned without the police chief. 

272 



That troubled mind was still unreconciled to the feet tnat this 
insolent giaour should be strutting about in a padishah uni- 
form, with padishah medals and sword. But he still did not 
quite know what to do about it. Nor had he managed to 
diake off his ignoble embarrassment. Since nothing more ef- 
feaive occurred to him, he tried to roll the staring eye. He 
planted himself, corpulent and challenging, before Bagradian. 

“We haven’t seen everything yet. . . . Up there. . . . There 
were several doors we didn’t open.’’ 

If Gabriel had managed to control himself, all would no 
doubt have ended happily. But he sprang on to the lowest 
step of the staircase, spread his arms out wide, and shouted: 
“That’s enoughl” 

Now, at last, the muahn had his case. He bore down with 
obvious pleasure on Bagradian, to hold a hst up under his 
nose. “What’s enough, you pig of an Armenian? Say that 
again. What’s enough, you unclean swine?’’ 

That second, in Bagradian’s mind, completed one of those 
highly complicated mental processes which engender our fates. 
It was an instant of the sheerest reflection. Gabriel realized 
clearly that his life, and not only his, was now in the balance. 
“Give in,” he thought, “and step aside. Let them go up again, 
and up there bribe the animal with ten pounds....” While 
his reason debated all this with impressive clarity, he himself 
was shouting, as never before: “Step back, gendarme. I’m a 
front-line officer.” 

This brought the muafin to the very centre of his aim. “An 
officer, are you? For me you aren’t even a stinking dead dog.” 
And with a quick tug he wrenched the silver medals off 
Gabriel’s tunic. 

Later Bagradian asserted that his hand had never touched 
his sword. The fact was that, in less than a second, he found 
himself sprawling on the ground. The sword splintered against 
tho wall. One sapueh was kneeling on Gabriel’s chest, the rest 
were tearing off his uniform, Gonzague and the women rushed 

273 



fuyt nf thi> ytlamlilc. StqiKan’g thnnte ming l e d with the 
grunts o£ hit father. It was not a minute bdEoie Gidviel |a/ 
dtere stripped to his boots. He was bleeding from a few fieira 
woimds. His life would not have been worth a para, had 
Gonzague Maris not saved him from instant slaughter by 
turning all the attention to lumsdL Though his gesture was 
careless, it told with the sharpest effea. His voice had that im> 
pressive note in it which obtains the iciest quiet in the midst 
of commotion. He had pulled out his papers and stood holding 
them high above his head. This gesture caught everyone’s eyes. 
The mudir stared at him, perturbed. The police chief turned 
in his direction; even the saptiehs let go of Gabriel. 

Gonzague unfolded his documents with all the calm of a 
secret agent sent by Ittihad to keep a sharp eye on the conduct 
of local authorities. “Here you are. Passport of the United 
States of America, with a visa from the General Consulate in 
Istanbul.” He stressed these insignificant words in such an 
authoritative staccato that he might have been apprising them 
all of some secret diplomatic mission of decisive importance 
to Turkey. “Here— teskere for the interior, autographed by 
His Excellency in person. You understand me, Effendi?” 

It was not this empty flourish with a passport that had saved 
Bagradian’s life — it was the desperate tnck which made them 
forget him. For some minutes it confused the mudir. In the 
various instructions issued for the guidance of deportation 
authorities, it was indicated over and over again that the 
methods of applying this measure must be kept as unobtrusive 
as possible in the presence of Allied and neutral consuls. For 
an instant the mudir really imagined that he must be dealing 
with a confidential agent of the American embassy. A glance 
at the papers, however, assured him that this person was harm' 
less. But he was really glad that the foreigner’s interference 
had prevented bloodshed. He returned Gonzague his papers, 
with mocking ceremony. 

“What do your passports matter to me? You’d better ma1t«» 

374 



K»SQc m$ tooa a p^Ue— or Ffi Inve you arrested.* 

*Tht ccmstable’s conftmon abated more slowly. Blood im- 
pressed him far less than paper. In the course of his career 
documents had often been inconvenient. You were never siue 
what they might not do to you in the end. He decided to let 
Bagradian go on living, at least for the present. The thing 
could be done just as well on a highroad, without witnesses 
who held American passports. The muafin put his revolver, 
already primed, back in its case, took another swollen and 
staring glance at this naked officer, spat a huge gobbet, and 
gave his saptiehs the curt order: “Gtt along now for those 
horses and mules.” 

- The mudir had missed his elective exit. He had to content 
himself by following the armed executive in as thoughtful 
and detached a manner as oossibl^ leaving no resonant echo 
of personality. 

Gabriel, breathing hard, had scrambled up. Shame, and no 
other sensation, possessed his mind. Juliette had had to witness 
this horror— she and Stephan. His eyes sought his wife, who 
stood there rigid, her face averted. Gabriel tottered, then con- 
trolled himself. Behind his back he felt something tremble— 
Iskuhi. Then his few scratches began to burn. They were not 
worth mentiomng. Iskuhi, silent, on stocking feet, crept close. 
Her imploring eyes sought Samuel Avakian. The student 
came with a coat to cover Gabriel’s sweat-streaked body. 

A FAVOURABLE tum of evcnts. The mudir, the poUce chief, and 
the saptiehs left the villages that same day to turn their at- 
tention to Armenians in Suedia and £1 Eskel. It was one of 
the best-considered nuances of the Turkish government’s mi- 
gration policy that it never specified the exact day and hour 
of a given march. Since the deportation was officially a war- 
time measure of military necessity, and since also it was semi- 
officially punitive, the “moment of surprise” which gave ban- 
ishment its peculiar poignancy, must not be neglected in either 

37s 



of these interpretations. But Pas^r Harutiun Nokhudian had 
managed by heavy bribes to elicit the fact that the first convoy 
had been fixed to leave on July 31. Between then and now a 
hundred extra saptiehs would reinforce the first contingent. 
The thirty-first would be a Saturday. Counting today, Thurs- 
day, that was two days. The Council of Leaders decided on the 
night of Friday to Saturday to move their populations up to 
the Damlayik. They had good reasons for their decision. Fri- 
day was the Turkish day of rest. Past experience made it ex- 
tremely probable that saptiehs in the Christian villages would 
vacate them on Friday for the Turkish and Arab villages in 
the plain, in which there were mosques, relations, amusements, 
and women. And, with the sapti^s, the plundering riff-raff 
would also probably vanish for the day, since they felt with a 
certain amount of justice that, once there was no saptieh to 
interfere, the Armenians, in spite of being unarmed, would 
make quick work of them with scythes, axes, and hammers. 

These special circumstances, therefore, exaedy predeter- 
mined the choice of time. The Council of Leaders reckoned 
on the following developments: The returning saptiehs, arriv- 
ing on the morning of Saturday, would find, mstead of the 
whole people, only Pastor Nokhudian with his five hundred 
Protestants m Bitias. The pastor — ^this ruse came from Gabriel 
—was to tell the mudir a long story of how, notwithstandmg 
his supplications, all the people had packed their belongings in 
the night and set out of their own accord into exile. Their 
reason for this had been their terror of the saptiehs, and of 
the police chief especially. He could not say exaedy which 
roads they had taken, since people had set out in small groups 
in every conceivable direction: one group towards Arsus and 
Alexandretta, another southwards, but all with the intendon 
of avoiding inhabited places. The largest group had certainly 
meant to find its way to Aleppo, to take shdtcr in the big 
town. Pastor Nokhudian, whose mildness and Chrisdau spirit 
of obedience had caused many to mistake him for a coward, 

276 



revealed his heroism. This deception which he undertook to 
practise meant at the least death, as far as he was concerned. 
The instant the Turks discovered the stratagem, it would be 
all over with him. He shrugged his shoulders. Where was 
there no danger of death? The fighters on the mountain had 
to gain time. This feint would postpone discovery several 
days and give them su/haent grace to complete the defences. 

The Council met in Ter Haigasun’s presbytery. The priest 
was very disfigured from the blow of the constable’s whip. 
His right eye and cheek were swollen; a violet weal striped 
his whole face and half-way up his forehead. He had lost two 
teeth, and it was easy to sec he was in great pain. Gabriel’s 
scratches, on the other hand, could scarcely be felt under 
Altoum’s plaster. The physical brutality he had suffered — the 
first, in all his sheltered, remote existence — ^had drawn him 
even closer to all the rest. At this sitting the Council discussed 
a very disquicung, adverse cucumstance, which unluckily 
it was already too late to remedy. In peaceful years the villagers 
had been in the habit of buying grain in July, after the harvest, 
from Turkish and Arab peasants in the plains. They them- 
selves scarcely grew any grain. This year, dazed with the 
threat overhanging, they had put off buying their usual pro- 
visions against the winter. This delay was now a serious mat- 
ter. The villagers had flour, potatoes, and maize, but in very 
insufficient quantities. To hold out with these for any time 
would necessitate the greatest economy. And since Armenians 
were used to much bread and httle meat, this lack of it was a 
terrible problem for the leaders. Added to which, for the first 
few days there would be no chance on the Damlayik of bak- 
ing, since the brick ovens would have to be dug into the 
earth. Pastor Aram therefore decreed that, till Friday evening, 
every tonir must be kept alight in the villages, so that as many 
flat cakes as possible might be ready before they left the valley. 

Ter Haigasun concluded the session with the announce- 
ment of a solemn mass of petition for the following mornings 

377 



Friday.- After mass the bells were to be taken out of 
towety carried to the churchyard in solemn procession, smd 
buried. There the whole people should take leave o£ them , 
praying before the graves of its fathers. Ter Haigasun further 
aimounced that he intended to take several barrel-loads of 
consecrated earth up to the Damlayik. Those who died up 
there, in the camp or in battle should not have to lie quite 
abandoned in the merciless wasteland, but should be given a 
han dful of their ancient, consecrated ground on which, at 
least, to rest their heads. 

On the Friday morning the saptiehs did in fact take their 
departure, to the last man, into Mohammedan country. Mudir 
and muahn had ridden to Antioch. The Church of die Ever- 
Increasing Angelic Powers was fuller, long before the ap- 
pointed time, than it ever had been since it was consecrated. 
The atrium and the square nave over which rose the tall cen- 
tral cupola, the two side aisles, and even the platform upon 
which rose the high altar could scarcely hold the congregation. 
Since the church, according to very old custom, had no win- 
dows, sharp amber blades of sunlight, like the eyes of the 
Trinity, pierced the oblong slits in the wall, shaped like arrow- 
slits in a fortress. But these crossed shafts of light did not 
illuminate; they merely served to dim the candles and cast a 
network of curious shadows upon the crowd. Today there 
were not only hundreds of faithful, come to Yoghonoluk to 
mass from the smaller villages, but also all the priests and 
choir-singers, to assist at this last high mass “on solid ground." 
Never yet had the choir sung its choral, announcing at the 
foot of the altar the vesting of the priest in the sacristy, in so 
full a voice: 

"Deep secret, incomprehensible, without beginningl 
Thou hast adorned with glory 
The host of the beings of fire." 

Never had Ter Haigasun bowed more deeply, nor made 
more complete and shuddering an a dm ission of sin before 



die people. Under his gdd mitre die weal of the viHbip stood 
out on his face. And never before had the secret of the kiss of 
peace, the reunion of the community in Christ, bound the 
souls of these faithful in holier ties. At other masses, when 
after the sacrificial prayer the deacon, at the words: “Greet ye 
one another with the holy kiss,” had held the thurible up to 
the lip^ of the chief singer (Teacher Asayan) — ^when this 
singer had kissed the one next to Him, so that the embrace 
might continue through the choir and from the choir through 
the people — ^it had usually been in a series of quick litde 
touches, mere slack formality. But today they held each other 
close and really kissed on cheeks or mouth. Many were in 
tears. When after the communion the assistant priests, at a 
sign from Ter Haigasun, began stripping the altar, a wild, un- 
expected pain Rung the whole congregation on its knees. Un- 
controllable grief, groans, wailings, rose above the glimmering 
play of shadows, above the crossed, flaming seraphim swords 
of the sun, up into the tall, dun cupola. Each of the holy ves- 
sels was held up high before it disappeared in a straw-plaited 
basket: chalice, paten, dborium, and the great book of the 
Gospels. The sacristan packed the censers, the silver candle- 
sticks and crucifixes, into another box. At last there was only 
the lace altar-cloth. Ter Haigasun crossed himself for the last 
tim^ let his hands — their hue that of yellowish church tapers 
— ^hover for a while over the altar-cloth till, with a sudden 
jerk, he lifted it. The unveiled stone stood bare, which had 
once been hewn out of the grey rock of Musa Dagh. In the 
same instant old Tomasian’s workmen were letting down the 
bells, the big one and the smaller one, by pulleys from the 
campanile. It needed all their strength to raise the heavy metal 
on to the two biers, each of which were to be carried by eight 
men.. 

Acolytes bearing the tall Greek cross headed the procession. 
Then, with their bells, the stumbling coffin-bearers. After 
them. Ter Haigasim'and the other priests. It took a consider- 



able time for this funeral cortege to reach the graveyard of 
Yoghonoluk. The train of mourners really seemed to be escort- 
ing an honoured body to the grave. The heat was deadening. 
Only at the rarest intervals did a breath from the Mediter- 
ranean find its way across Musa Dagh to mitigate the Syrian 
summer. Swirling dust-clouds ran before the procession, like 
spectral dancers before the Ark, a thin, degenerate variety of 
the sacred pillars of cloud which went before the Israelites in 
the wilderness. The churchyard lay far along the road to 
Habibli, the wood-carvers’ village. Like most graveyards in 
the East, it crept up the slope of a hill and was not surrounded 
by any wall. This, together with its gravestones, either fallen 
or slanting deep in the sod, their weatherbeaten limestone 
crudely chiselled with inscription and cross, gave it almost the 
look of a Turkish or Jewish burial-ground in the Near East. 
As the procession turned into it, there was a grey, bat-hke 
fluttering and scurrying, hither and thither, between cairns and 
monuments. These were old women, whose flimsy garments 
were held together only by their substratum of dirt and dust. 
Old women everywhere feel drawn to cemeteries. In the West 
also, we know these pensioners of death, tomb-dwellers, keen- 
ing wives, guardians of corruption, whose begging is often only 
their second trade. But here in Yoghonoluk this was a recog- 
nized class, a close corporation of nestlers in churchyard 
mould, wailing women and helpers at a birth, who, according 
to the tradition of these villages, had to live on the outskirts 
of each community. One or two old beggar-men, with biblical, 
prophetic heads, were among them, and a few cripples, fan- 
tastically deformed, such as only the East engenders. The peo- 
ple protected itself against the dross of its own loins by banish- 
ing It, in the absence of any institutions or homes for the aged 
poor, into Its cemetery, a place both sacred and unclean. So 
that now nobody felt scared when two mad women rushed 
to hide, with heart-rending shneks, up the graveyard hill. This 
churchyard and its neighbourhood formed the alms-house^ 

280 



hosfAtal, and mad-house of Yoghonoluk. It was even more; it 
was the place to which sorcery had been relegated. The torch 
enlightenment, in the hands of Altouni, l^ikor, Shatakh* 
ian, and their predecessors, had driven magic beyond the con- 
fines of the villages and yet not killed it. These keening spey- 
wives, under the leadersUp of Nunik, Vartuk, Manushak, had 
fled so far before the hatred of the doctor, but no farther. 
Here they awaited their chents, to be summoned not only for 
death vigils and corpse-washings, but far more often to an ob- 
stinate illness or a child-birth, since many trusted less in Al- 
touni’s science than in the herb-potions, magic formulas, and 
prayers for health of Nunik, Vartuk, Manushak. In this ancient 
quarrel science did not always come out best. That was un- 
deniable. Superstition had an incalculable advantage in the 
variety of its potions and old wives* cures. And Altouni had 
no bedside manner. Once he had given up a case, he sharply 
refused to raise false hopes. A creature like Nunik, on the 
other hand, could never get to the end of her stored-up knowl- 
edge, nor would she bow before death. If a patient died on her, 
he had only himself to blame for havmg sent, in a moment 
of weakness, for Altouni, and so brought all her skill to 
naught. Nunik was the living emblem of her art. The village 
women told each other how, m the days of the first Avetis, she 
had been seventy, just as she was today. The enlightened per- 
secuted these spey-wivcs, and chased them from among the 
living. But that did not prevent their creeping at night from 
their haunt of death to go about their secret business in all 
seven villages. Now, however, they were all collected in the 
churchyard, to take their share of alms with the blind and 
the halt. Sato had left the cortege and run on ahead. She had 
long had many cronies among the grave-folk. These border 
people attracted her borderline soul. They were so easy to live 
withl It was so hard to live with the Bagradians! Though 
gifts of clothes from the great hanum might feed Sato’s vanity, 
in reality she felt as uncomfortable in them, in shoes, stock- 

aSz 



i&g% in a dean room, as a wild dog in a collar. With 
and 5|)ey>wives, and with mad people^ Sato could give fixe 
rdn to her thoughts, in words that had no special meaniiig. 

how delightEul to kick oS the speech- of the great, like a 
tight shoc^ and talk with bare feet! Nunik, Vartuk, M a n u sh a k , 
had secrets to tell her which made her whole soul shiver in 
unison, as though she too had brought them into this world 
with her, from the life of her ancestors. Then she would sit 
sdll and listen for hours, while the blind beggars beside her 
fumbled over her thin child’s body with alert, sensitive fingers. 
Had there been no Iskuhi, Sato might have let the others go 
up to the Damlayik, while she lived at ease among the grave- 
folk. These happy souls were not to be taken into the narrow 
confines of the mountain camp. The leaders had passed the 
resolution, with one dissentient, Bagradian. He, though as 
commander he saw clearly that every superfluous mouth would 
enfeeble resistance, had not wanted to exclude any A rmenian. 
But these outcasts seemed neither unhappy at this decision 
nor especially scared. They stretched out hands and snouts to 
their compatriots with all the usual beggars’ litany. 

The sky was so scorchingly empty that the very notion of a 
cloud might have seemed a story-teller’s fable. This inexorable 
blue seemed never to have known a drop of rain since the 
Deluge. The people crowded about the open grave to take 
leave of the bells of Yoghonoluk. In peaceful days their sound 
had scarcely been noticed. But this was like the silencing of 
their own lives. The mother bell and her daughter were low- 
ered into earth amid breathless quiet. The muted ring of scat- 
tered clods upon the metal was like a prophecy to these people 
that now there could be no more going bade home and no 
resurrection from the dead. After a short prayer said by Ter 
Haigasun, the communes dispersed among their graves, si- 
lently, and the separate families went to take a last look at 
their fathers’ resting-place. Gabriel and Stephan did the <mm#» 
and wandered to dbe Bagradian mausoleum. It was a small, 

282 



low lioiis^ under a cupcda, shaped like dbe mounds in which 
Turks biiry duir worthies and saintly men. Grandfather Avetis 
had built it for hims elf and his old wife. The founder of aU 
their splendour lay, by Arm enian tradition, without a cefiSn, in 
his shroud, under stone slabs, slanted against each other like 
praying hands. Apart from him and his wife, there was only 
one other Bagradian buried h e re— Avetis the brother, faithful 
to Yoghonoluk, not long a dead man. "There wouldn’t have 
been room for any more of us,” reflected Gabriel, who oddly 
did not feel in the least serious, but rather amused. Stephan, 
bored, shifted from foot to foot. He felt so many sons away 
from death. 

Surrounded by a litde knot of people Ter Haigasun stood 
at the top of the slope on the last outskirts of the dead land. 
Some diggers had shovelled out a wide spare pit, like a fosse 
commune. Five barrels were filled with the earth they dug, 
and when these were ready. Ter Haigasun went from one to 
the other and made the sign of the cross over each. He stopped 
before the last and bent down over it. This was not bhek 
loam, but poor and crumbling earth. Ter Haigasun dipped 
into the barrel and laid a handful of consecrated ground 
against his face, like a peasant testing the soil. 

“May It suffice,” he said to himself. Then in surprised cogita> 
tion he stood looking down over the graveyard, already almost 
deserted. Most of the villagers had long since set out for home. 
It was getting on towards midday. In the larger villages such 
as Bitias and Habibli, similar ceremonies were being per- 
formed. But the Council had appointed the hour after sunset 
for setting out. 

Gabriel made the most considerate arrangements for Juliette. 
Drawn into this Armenian gulf, she should miss her own 
world as little as circumstances could possibly allow. True that 
this European world of hers was also engaged in a dog-fight, 
compared to which all dse of the kind seemed a poindess, 

383 



liaphazard brawL But there the dog'*iight was being conducted 
with all modern conveniences, according to the most advanced 
scientific principles, not with the innocent blood-lust of the 
beast of passion, but with the mathematical thoroughness and 
precision of the beast of intellect. If we were still in Paris — 
Gabriel might, for instance, have told himself — ^we should not, 
it is true, have to sleep on the stony earth of a Syrian moun- 
tain, we should still have a bathroom and W.C. But, for all 
that, we should be liable at any hour of the day or night to 
leave these comforts for the dark cellar, to hide from aerial 
bombs. So that, even in Paris, Stephan and Juliette would still 
be exposed to a certain risk. None of which reflections oc- 
curred to Gabriel, for the simple reason that for months he 
had seen no European newspapers, and knew next to nothing 
about the war. 

On the previous night he had sent Avakian and Kristaphor, 
with all his household servants, up to the Damlayik, so that 
Juhette’s quarters might be got ready. They were prepared 
with the very greatest care. “Three-Tent Square” must have 
its own kitchen and scullery, with every usual arrangement. 
Gabriel had ordered that Juliette should have all three tents 
at her disposal. She was to say which she would hke to hve in. 
With endless labour, carpets, braziers, divans, tables, arm- 
chairs, had been dragged up the Damlayik, and an astonish- 
ing collection of smart luggage — ^wardrobe-trunks, shiny 
leather suitcases, baskets for crockery and silver, a whole col- 
lection of medicine bottles and toilet articles, hot-water bottles, 
thermos flasks. Gabriel wanted Juliette to take comfort from 
the sight of these European conveniences. She was to live like 
an adventurous princess, travelling for a whim, surrounded 
with toys. And for just this reason his own hfe, in the eyes 
of the people, must seem tvnee as Spartan. He had made up 
his mind not to sleep in a tent, nor eat food cooked in “Three- 
Tent Square.” 

Back from their graves the Yoghonoluk villagers took a last 



look at houses^ no longer theirs. Each of them had a huge 
corded bundle heavier than his strength, to carry up 
him. Dazed and unhappy, iidgding and straying about their 
rooms, they awaited the night. Here was the mat one had had 
to leave, here stood a lamp, and there, Christ Saviourl stood 
the bed. The expensive bed, saved up for through hard work- 
ing years, so tha( one might become a better man by the 
possession of this fortress of himily Lfe. And now the bed 
must be left standing, mere loot for Tiurk and Arab scum. 
The hours dragged on. And in these homes everything was 
unpacked and packed again, to see if room could not be made 
for this or that unnecessary object in the bundle. Even in the 
craziest tumble-down hovels there took place these poignant 
separations from the household gear that envelops the human 
being in his illusions and in his love. 

Gabriel, like all the rest, went straying late that afternoon 
through the rooms of his house. They were dead and empty. 
Juliette, with Gonzague Mans and her establishment, had set 
out hours ago for the mountain. Since the day was intolerably 
hot, she had longed for the coolness she expected to find-thcrc. 
Nor had she wanted to be caught in crowds of villagers on 
the move. Gabriel, who could feel some passing regret at leav- 
ing the most casually slept-in hotel bedroom (since everywhere 
one leaves a bit of oneself, a beloved departed), was quite un- 
moved. This house of his fathers, the place where he had 
been a child, had lived through these last decisive months, 
had nothing to say to him. He marvelled at this lack of all 
emotion, but it was so. The only things he regretted even a 
little were his antiques, those colleaor’s joys of the first happy 
weeks in Yoghonoluk. He kept turning from Artemis and 
Apollo to the glorious Mithras, stroking the faces of gods with 
a tender hand. Then, at the selamlik door, he turned sharply 
away and gave up the house, its lares and penates, for ever. 

In an innyard, l^twards from the villa, an unusual scene was 
being played. Those dregs of Yoghonoluk not permitted to 

285 



l(dlow odKn into camp had gathered togeth^ there. The 
keening women, the beggars with prophetic faeeds» « feif 
stray brats escaped horn thdr parents, formed an excited 
group. That Sato, the orphan of Zeitun, should have been 
with them is not to be wondered at. One personality stood out 
from them, whose impressive power even Gabriel could ntt 
manage to ignore. This was old Nunik, chieftainess of magic 
healers and conjuring women. The dark face of this female 
Wandering Jew, whose origins were lost in the grey of ages, 
was distinguished by more than a nose half eaten away. It 
was informed with the feroaous energy by which Nunik had 
raised herself to the invincible leadership of her caste. The 
story that she was well over a hundred might be mere fraud, 
a rumour set going by Nunik for advertisement, and yet her 
very appearance of timeless age seemed almost the indestructi' 
ble guarantee of the worth of her cures and of the healing 
quality in the rough life she led. Numk held between her 
hard, stringy thighs a black laipb, no doubt strayed from the 
herds^ and she was slitting its throat open from underneath. 
It seemed a very workmanlike slit, done with the quietest of 
hands, while her lips parted under the horrible, lupus<eatea 
nose from over a gleaming set of magnificently youthful teeth. 
It gave her such a look of grinning relish that Bagradian bst 
his temper at the sight. 

"What are you all doing here, you set of low thieves?” 

A prophet tapped his way to the front, to inform bitn vdth 
unapproachable dignity: “It’s the blood-test, Effendi, and it’s 
being done on your behalf.” 

Bagradian nearly flung himself'on the rabble. “Where did 
you steal that lamb from? Don’t you know that anyone who 
touches the people’s property can be shot or hanged?” 

The prophet seemed not to notice the base aspersions. "Better 
watch, Effendi, to see which way the blood will flow. Towards 
the mountain or towards the house.” 

286 



Os^d saw how die landi’s ctadc blood came tfarobbiag out 
of k, collected oa die £at, smooth place bebw it into a thick 
pool, which rose and rose in a growing drde until the last 
drops &11, Still the puddle seemed undecided, as though it 
had some secret injunction to obtain. At last, three little 
tongues edged charily forwards, but stopped at once, till sud- 
dcnly an impetuous rill wound itself out, wriggling quickly 
on — towards the house. The mob went mad with excitement. 

"Koh yem! The blood goes to the house!” 

Nunik bent down dose over the blood-pool — as though 
from its nature and the tempo of its course she could tell with 
the greatest preasion something of importance. As she raised 
her head, Gabriel saw that the twisted grin which had so 
roused him was the usual look of her ravaged face. But she 
spoke in a curiously soft, old voice that did not seem to be her 
own: “Ellendi, those on the mountam will be saved.” 

In that instant Gabriel remembered the coins given him by 
the Agha, and left forgotten m the villa. “I’ll have those at 
least," he thought; “it’d be a pity . . .” He went back. At the 
door of the villa he hesitated. Should one ever turn back again 
from a journey? Then he hurried on, in long quick strides, 
to his bedroom, and took the coins from their case. He hdd 
the gold one up to the light; Ashod Bagrathuni’s head stood 
out from it in the finest chiselling. The Greek inscription 
round the edge of the silver coin ran, without divisions into 
words, into an almost unreadable circle of letters; 

“To the inexplicable, in us and above us.” 

Gabriel put them in his pocket. He left the garden through 
the west door in the park wall without turning back to look 
at the villa. A few step farther, he stopped to look at his 
watch, still absurdly set to European time. The sun was al- 
ready above the Damlayik. Gabriel Bagradian noted care- 
fully the hour and minute at which his new life had begun. 



Soon after sundown the people of the seven villages, heavily 
laden, had moved out in groups or families to toil up the 
steeps by all the most available paths. 

A dense moon, incredibly metaUic, rose behind the jagged 
grey peaks of the Amanus, in the north-east. It sailed on visibly 
dirough the sky, nearer and nearer. It was no longer some- 
thing flat stuck against the vault of heaven. The black depths 
behind it grew more and more distinct. Nor was the earth, 
for Gabriel, the usual stable abiding-place, but the little vehicle 
through the cosmos that it is in reahty. And this stereoscopic 
cosmos not only extended beyond the plastic moon, but forced 
itself down into the valley to bathe in coolness every pore of 
Gabriel’s resting body. The moon was already half-way over 
the sky, and the panting groups still toiled on past him. It was 
always the same silhouette. In front, grimly prodding the 
ground with his stick, the father, loaded with baggage. A gruif 
call, a lamenting answer. The women stumbled under loads 
which bowed them almost to the earth. In spite of these, they 
had to keep a sharp look-out, to sec that the goats were not 
straying. And yet, now and again, under these burdens, there 
came a little spurt of young girl’s laughter, an eye sparkling 
encouragement. Gabriel started out of a half-sleep. Innumer- 
able children were lifting up their voices to weep. Hundreds 
of squalling children — as though they had all at the same in- 
stant discovered that their parents had gotie away. And in the 
midst of this the short grunting voices and shrill reproofs of 
many grandmothers. But no — they were not abandoned in- 
fants, only the cats of Yoghonoluk, Azir, and Bitias. Cats have 
seven lives and as many souls, and each soul its own voice. 
Therefore, to kill a cat, you must kill him seven times (Sato 
had long had this wisdom from Nunik). In real truth their 
masters’ absence did not move the cats of Yoghonoluk, Azir, 
and Bitias in the least, for cats serve only the house with their 
seven lives, not its human beings. Perhaps they were even 
squalling for joy in their new, imbridled lease of life. The 

288 



^>g8 really ..suffered. Even the wild dog of Syrian villages 
never quite gets away from men. He can never find his way 
back to himself, to fox, jackal, wolf. He may have been wild 
for countless generations, he is, and remains, the dismissed 
employee of avilization. He souffles longingly round houses 
not merely for a bone, but to get himself taken back into 
slavery, to be set to the tasks he has forgotten. The wild dogs 
of the villages knew all this. Already they had nosed out the 
camp on the Damlayik. But they also knew that this camp, 
unlike the village street, was strictly forbidden them. Madly 
they scurried up the forbidden mountain, grovelled their way 
through brushwood, rusdcd hke snakes under myrde and 
arbutus bushes. Not one of them got the bright idea of going 
off to Moslem neighbourhoods, to beg bones in Chalikhan or 
Ain Ycrab. They still adored this faithless people which had 
now abandoned its common dwelling-place. Their souls 
seemed to perish in wild grief, yet few of them dared to utter 
their monosyllabic bark, which has long since lost the exten- 
sive, much inflected, civilized vocabulary of European house 
dogs. These dogs’ whole grief was in their eyes. Everywhere 
round him in the dark Gabriel caught glints of the green fire 
of these eyes, rapturously curious, which dared not venture 
nearer forbidden ground. 

The moon had vanished behind the back of Musa Dagh. A 
faint wind had cqpie into being. “They’re all up there by 
now,” reflected Gabriel, past whom, over an hour before, the 
last group had plodded its way. And yer, either from weariness 
or the sheer need to be alone, he could still not tear him«pif 
loose from this dark observation post. How could he tell that 
this might not be the last time in his life at which he would 
be able to be alone? And had not this power to be alone al- 
ways seemed to him God’s best gift? He granted himself an- 
other half-hour of this extra-rnundane, peace — then he would 
have to push on up to the north defences to superintend and 
hurry on the trench-digging. He leaned back against the oak 

289 



bdiiod lum anci smoked Out dt the darkoett came a rexj 
tistdy strag^er indeed Gabriel heard the dip-clop of hodEi^ 
and stones rolling away. He saw a lantern, thra a man with a 
donkey, both piled up with towering burdens. Each stqp the 
donkey took was almost a faU. Yet the man dragged a mon- 
strous sack, which every few minutes he set down, panting 
and gasping. Gabrid recognized the apothecary only when 
Krikor’s sack came thudding at his feet Krikor’s {ace looked 
distorted; the impassive mandarin’s countenance had become 
the mask of some furious warrior divinity. Sweat streamed 
over the polished checks into the long goatee, which jerked up 
and down for want of breath. He seemed in great pain, and 
hunched his shoidders, bending far forward. 

Gabrid revealed himself; “You ought to have given your 
drug-sack to my people, instead of trying to drag your whole 
chemist’s shop alone.” 

Krikor still strove to get his breath. Yet, even so, he could 
put a certain aloofness into his answer: “None of this has 
anything to do with my drugs. I sent those up several hours 
ago. 

Gabrid had by now observed that both the chemist and his 
ass were laden exdusively with books. For some vague reason 
this annoyed him and inspired him with the wish to mnrk 
“Forgive my mistake. Apothecary. Are these the only pro- 
visions you’ve managed to bring?” , 

Krikor’s face was again impassive. He eyed Gabriel with all 
his usual detachment: “Yes, Bagradian, these are my pro- 
visions— unluckily not the whole of them.” A coughing-fit 
shook him. He sat down and mopped his sweat with a mon- 
strous handkerchief. The starlight twinkled. The donkey 
stood with its heavy load and mdancholy knock-knees on the 
pathway. Minutes elapsed. Gabrid regretted his unkind im- 
pi^. But Krikor’s voice had regained all its old superiority. 

“Gabrid Bagradian, you, as a Paris savant, have had very 
difleroit chances from mine, the Yoghonoluk Yet 

ago 



one or two thii^ have escaped yoa, whidi I have 
perceived. Posi&ljr you never heard tlw saying oi the sublime 
Gr^ry Nazianzen, nor the answer he recdved &cmi the 
pagan TertuUian.’' 

No wonder Gabriel was unacquainted with St. Gregory 
Nazianzen’s saying, since Krikor was the only man who had 
heard it. He related it in his usual lo£ty voice, with supreme, 
lordly detachment— though, to be sure, his confusion (d Ter- 
tullian, the Church Father, with a pagan of the same name 
was a sign that Jove can nod. 

“Once the sublime Gregory Namnzen was invited to dinner 
by the august pagan, Tertulhan.— Have no fear, Bagradian, 
the story is as short as it is profound. They spoke of the good 
harvest and the fine white bread which they were breaking 
together. A sunbeam lay across the table. Gregory Nazianzen 
lifted up his bread in his hands and said to Tertullian: ‘My 
friend, we must thank God for His great mercy— for see, this 
bread which tastes so delicious is notldng else than this golden 
sunbeam which, out in the fields, has dianged itself into wheat 
for us.’ Tertullian, however, stood up from table and drew 
down a work of the poet Vergil from his shelves. He said to 
Gregory: ‘My friend and guest — if we praise God for a mere 
slice of bread, how much more, then, must we not praise 
Him for this book. For sec, this book is the transformed sun- 
beam of a far higher sun than that whose beams we can watch 
with our eyes across the table.’ ” 

After a while Gabriel asked in melancholy sympathy: “And 
your whole library, Krikor? This can be only a sample of it. 
Have you buried the books?” 

Krikor rose as stiffly as a wounded hero: “I did not bury 
them. Books perish in the ground. I left them, just as they 
were." 

Gabriel took up the lantern which the apothecary had for- 
gotten. It was getting lighter, and Krikor could not hide the 
fact that tears ran down his inscrutable parchment cheeks. 

291 



Bagradian shouldered the old man’s sadc: "Do you really 
think, Apothecary,” he said, "that I was only born for service* 
rifles, cartridge bdts, and trench-digging?” 

Though iGikor protested again and again, Gabriel carried 
hit heavy sack to the North Saddle; 



BOOK TWO 


THE STRUGGLE OF THE WEAK 


“And the winepress was trodden, vdthout the city . . 

RxvsLAnoM xiv, 20 




1 


Life on the Mountain 

Musa Dagb! Mountain of Moses! At its summit, in the grey 
dawn-light, a whole population set up its camp. The mountain 
top, the windy air, the sea surge, put such new life into this 
people that the toil of the night seemed dispersed and for- 
gotten. No more strained and exhausted faces, but only 
excited-looking ones. In and around the Town Enclosure 
they ran past one another, shouting. No consciousness what 
ever of the underlying reality of it all, only a pugnacious stir , 
Like .a spring torrent, small and overwhelming urgencies 
swept away aU thoughts of the whole. Even Ter Haigasun, 
deebng the wooden altar at the centre of the camp, and so 
engaged in getting things ship-shape for eternity, was shouting 
impatiently at the men who helped him in the work. 

Gabriel had climbed die point selected by him as observa- 
tion post. From one of the rocky knolls of the Damlayik, it 
oifer^ a clear look-out to sea, across the Orontes plain and 
those undulations of the mountain which ebbed away towards 
Antioch. You could see the valley itself from Kheder Beg as 
far as Bitias. The outlying villages were hidden by bends in 
the road. Of course, besides this chief observation post, there 
were ten or twdve thrust-out spying-points, from wUch single 
sections of the valley could be closely observed. But here, well 
shielded by ridges of rock, he bad a clear view of the general 
outlines. Perhaps because, &om his position, he stood above 
the general scurry of the camp, Bagradian found himself 
suddenly, sharply con&onted, pierced to the quidc, by its 

295 



reality. There in the north, the east, the south, as far as 
Antakiya — no, as far as Mosul and Dcir ez-Zor— destruction, 
not to be evadedi Hundreds of thousands of Moslems, who 
would soon have only one objective — ^the smoking out of this 
insolent wasps’ nest on Musa Dagh. On the farther side an 
indifferent Mediterranean, sleepily surging round the sharp 
declivities of the mountain. No matter how close Cyprus might 
be, what French or English cruiser would take the least interest 
in this and length of Syrian coast quite out of the war zone? 
Certainly the fleets only put out in threatened directions, 
towards Suez and the North African coast, always sailing 
away from the dead Gulf of Alexandretta. Bagradian, looking 
over the desert sea, realized how impossibly — demagogically — 
he had behaved both towards himself and his hearers, when 
he tried, at the general assembly, to raise hopes of a rescuing 
gunboat. The scornfully empty horizon crushed his argu- 
ments. All round them, incalculable death, with not the nar- 
rowest cranny of escape — such was the truth. A huddled, 
piteous crowd of villagers, inescapably menaced on every side. 
And even that was not the whole truth. For should death 
from without — ^though not even a madman would have sup- 
posed it — ^remain benevolently inactive; though no attack 
should come, not one shot be fired — even so, another death, 
from within, would rise in their midst, to destroy them all. 
They might scrape and spare as much as they pleased, herds 
and supplies could not be renewed and, within measurable 
time, they would be exhausted. 

Down in the valley the thought of the Damlayik had 
seemed a release, since in bitter need the prospect of any kind 
of change works as an assuagement and a cure. But now they 
were firmly ensconced, the healing thought no longer sus- 
tained Gabriel. He had the sensation of having been hurled 
out of space and time. No doubt he could keep the inevitable 
at arm’s length for a few seconds, yet in exchange he had had 
to sacrifice the hundred cracks and loop-holes which chance 

296 



pttsents. Had not HarutiuniNokhudian made a waer decision 
£ot his dock? An icy compulsion had hold of GabrieL What 
an unforgivable sin against St^han and Juliettel Over and 
over again he had let slip the moment of escape, nor once 
seriously tried to shake Juliette out of her fool’s paradise, 
though he had known, even on that March Sunday, that the 
trap was closed. Violent giddmess, sudden emptiness in his 
head, succeeded this incredible fcelmg of guilt. The two hori- 
zons, land and sea, had begun to swirl. The whole earth was 
a twirling ring, and Musa Dagh its dead, fixed focus. But the 
true centre of that focus was Gabriel’s body, which, high 
though It stood, was in reahty the lowest point of rigidity 
above which swung this inescapable vortex. All we ask is to 
keep alive, he reflected horror-stricken. Instantly there followed 
the still thought: “But — why?” 

Gabriel rushed down to the Town Enclosure. The separate 
committees of the Council were sitting already, since the 
myriad tasks of the first day were not yet apportioned. He in- 
sisted that every active person, man or woman, should set to 
work instandy on the trenches and outposts already begun. 
This whole line of defences must be as good as complete by 
tomorrow evening. Who could tell whether the first Turkish 
assault might not be delivered within two days? He had to 
keep on urging again and again that defence, and all that 
appertained to it — the sharpest fighting disciphne — must take 
precedence of all other things. Since they had chosen Him to 
lead their resistance, it followed as the inevitable consequence 
that he must be given a free hand, not only over the front- 
line fighters, but the reserve— that is to say, over fighters and 
workers — ^the whole camp. Pastor Aram, who was unfortu- 
nately very touchy, kept saying that it was equally urgent to 
control the inner life of the community. At present it was all 
chaos— each family jealous of the living-space assigned to 
ei^ other, and the separate commimes equally di ssa risfi ed 
with their camping-ground. Bagradian seized on the pastor's 

297 



worsts. Tljere must be no such thing ai diasi^a&ctkWl, ^ 
was a state of acute emergency. Grousers must be dealt wltli 
out of hand, and ruthlessly punished. Kebussyan and the 
mukhtars at once began siding with the pastor. £ven Dr. 
Bedros Altouni obstinately insisted that the bodily needs of 
the people were the first t^ng to be considered, that work on 
the hospital-hut must be started at once, so that the sick might 
not get any worse. Then, one after another, teachers and 
mukhtars made rambling speeches— each on the particular 
urgency of his own particular job. Gabriel perceived with 
terror how hard it is to get a deliberating body to pass the 
most essential and obvious measure. But the constitution he 
had given them soon proved its efficacy. Ter Haigasun had 
the necessary authority to determine undecided cases. He made 
such skilful and unobtrusive use of it that their counsels had 
soon ceased to be troubled with dangerous and confusing 
suggestions. Gabriel was perfectly right. Everything else must 
give way to the work of defence. The rules of disaplme laid 
down several days ago by the counal must be read out in- 
stantly to the decads and, as from that moment, come into 
force. Everyone owed unconditional obedience to the chief. 
He had the definite advantage over all the other representa- 
tives of having learned to know war as a front-line officer. The 
Council ther^ore must give him complete authority in all 
which might concern defence, fighting preparations, and camp 
disciphne. Gabriel Bagradian and the members of his Defence 
Committee were in no way bound to submit their decisions 
to the General Council. Pastor Aram Tomasian had been 
given a seat on that committee, and Gabriel on the Committee 
for Internal Discipline, so that unnecessary friction might be 
avoided. And naturally the commander must have his own 
powers to inflict punishment. He must be able to deprive 
recalcitrants and lazy people of their rations, have them put 
in irons, punished with the bastinado, mild or severe^ as he 
might see fit. Only one punishment— death— remained at the 

398 



^ Coaodl havu^ luuid^ 
iQMi%^(^^8e4.k. -STory’ iahafaitant of, the camp must be 
i Pfiairife to realize from this &8t hour, the seriousness of a war 
situadoa. Ihe chief tadcs of the Camp Committee would be 
to provide for strict law and order, to make these difficult 
orcumstances seem natural, and to direct every effiort towards 
^ development of a normal, ordinary daily routine, just as 
much up here as down in the valley. Ter Haigasun kept stress- 
ing the words "normaT’ and “everyday.” On these unobtrusive 
powers, more than on any deed of heroism, would depend the 
strength and duration of their resistance. So that not one pair 
of hands must be left idle. Not even children must be without 
their regular work. No holiday wildness should encroach on 
this life-or-death struggle. School must still be taught in a 
place assigned to it, and in as disdphned and serbus a man- 
ner as ever. Teachers, as they came off duty, must take their 
turns in holding classes. Only unremitting work, concluded 
the priest, would enable people to sustain this life of depnva- 
tions. “So get to work. Let’s waste as little time as possible 
on talk.” 

The mukhtars assembled their communes on the big square 
before the altar, already marked out as the Town Enclosure. 
Bagradian ordered Chaush Nurhan to form up the eighty-six 
de^s of his first defence. That tyrant of recruits soon had 
them drawn up in front of the still unconsccrated altar, in 
neat square formation. Ter Haigasun climbed the altar tribune, 
a broad space raised fairly high above the square. He asked 
Bagradian, but no other leader, to stand beside him. Then he 
turned to the men and in a resonant voice read out the rules, as 
taken down by Avakian. These he supplemented with a few 
threatenmg words of his own. Anyone who disobeyed, or set 
himself up against, his chief would bring down instant punish- 
ment on himself. Let all newcomers from Turkish barradcs 
take that to heart. It was not an understood thing that they 
should be taken into camp and fed out of commund supplies. 

399 



-It was an aa of brodierly kindness by the conununes, wUch 
they would have to show themselves worthy. Ter Haigasoa 
took up the silver crucifix from the altar and came down into 
the ranks, along with GabrieL Slowly he administered the 
oath. The men had to repeat, with uplifted hands: 

“I swear before God the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost that I will defend this encamped people to the last drop 
of my blood; that I subordinate myself to my commander and 
all Im edicts, in blind obedience; that I acknowledge the 
authority of the elected Council of Leaders; that I will never 
leave the mountain for my own purposes — as God the Father 
shall help me to my salvation.” 

After this oath had been administered, the front-line men 
marched behind the altar. The eleven hundred reservists, men 
and women, divided into twenty-two groups, took a shorter 
oath of obedience and willingness to work. This reserve 
shouldered the mam burden of entrenchment and camp- 
building. It had nothing with which to ward off an attack 
but those scythes, pitchforks, and hammers which it had 
earned up with it from the valley. Lastly the three hundred 
adolescents, the “light cavalry,” marched forward. Ter Haiga- 
sun made them a short speech of admomshment, and Gabriel 
explained their duties as scouts, signallers, and liaison-runners. 
He divided these youngsters up into three secuons, by “picking 
them out.” The first were to garrison the observation posts and 
concealed look-outs, and send a report every two hours to 
headquarters. The hundred oldest and most reliable boys were 
chosen for this very important duty. It would also be their job 
to post sentries, day and night, on the “Dish Terrace,” to use 
their sharp young eyes to keep a look-out for the smoke (vain 
hope!) of passing ships. The second section were to do orderly 
work. This hundred must always be somewhere about around 
headquarters, to take the commander’s orders in any direction, 
and keep him in touch with the various sectors of the defence. 
Samuel Avakian was put in command of this corps of orderlies 

300 



and Ste|>han enrolled in it. Finally, the third hundred were to 
be at Pastor Aram’s disposal, for general use about the camp 
and, for instance, to carry rations out to the line. 

This dividing up of the villagers by Bagradian instantly re- 
vealed its advantages. The martial self-importance which 
swelled the breasts of the various decads, the pricking itch to 
command, with which lower officers were at once infected, 
the childish delight in forming ranks and playing soldiers — all 
these human traits served to veil completely, in the beneficent 
ardour of a game, any deeply uneasy sense of the inevitable. 
As, soon after this, the ranks marched off to trench-building, 
there arose here and there, shyly yet stubbornly, the old 
workers’ song of the valley: 

“Days of misfortune pass and are gone, 

Like the days of winter, they come and they go; 

The sorrows of men do not last very long, 

Like the buyers in shops, they come and go.’’ 

Gabriel summoned Chaush Nurhan and the heads of the 
most important decads. But meanwhile Ter Haigasun had left 
the altar square for that of the Three Tents, near a great well- 
spring. Sheltered on three sides by fern-grown rocks and 
myrtle bushes, its beauty was a signal proof of how carefully 
Juliette was looked after. Ter Haigasun asked to speak to the 
hanum Juliette Bagradian. Since Kristaphor, Missak, Hov- 
hannes, and the other servants were all engaged in setting up 
the adjacent “kitchen square,’’ the priest found only Gonzague 
Marts to take his message. That young man was pacing rapidly 
up and down, as passengers walk for exercise up and down 
the narrow deck of a liner. The Greek-went to Juliette’s canvas 
tent and struck the litde gong which hung at the entrance. But 
the hanum kept them waiting a very long time. When at last 
she appeared, she asked Maris to bring out a chair for Ter 
Haigasun. He refused to sit down, regretted that he had no 
time to spare. He let his hands slip out of sight into his wide 

301 



tkeves, and caat down his eyts. Wliat be sud, in bis idiS 
French, was diarged with £ormaiity. Madame’s kindness was 
known to everybody. He therefore begged Madame to honour 
his people by undertaking a speaal duty. It was necessary 
that a very large white banner, with a red cross, should be set 
up on the ledge of rock jutting out to sea, on the steep side 
behind the mouivtain, to give any ships which God, in His 
mercy, might choose to send them knowledge of their desperate 
plight. Therefore the banner must bear an inscription in 
French and English: “Christians in need. Help!” Ter Haiga* 
sun bowed as he asked Juliette whether, with the help of 
some other women, she would be willing to get this banner 
prepared. She promised; but tepidly, indifferently. It was queer 
•^e Frenchwoman seemed to have no inkling of the honour 
Ter Haigasun was paying her, as much by his visit as this 
request, which he framed with all possible courtesy. She had 
grown indifferent again to all things Armenian. But when 
Ter Haigasun qiuckly left her, with nothing more than a 
curt nod, she suddenly became very restless, and herself 
sought out two big linen sheets, to be sewn together on the 
machme. 

Gabriel insisted again, to Chaush Nurhan and the othei‘ 
platoon leaders, on the need for the very strictest discipline. 
From now on let no one leave his post without permission. 
Nor must any man in the front line be allowed to sleep in the 
Town Enclosure with his family. Nights must be spent in 
the trenches unless special leave were given by the commander! 
Bagradian also set up his headquarters at a place where all 
could easily reach him. There, every day, two hours before 
sunset, he would hold a session, which every section and group 
commander must attend. He would be ready to hear requests, 
complaints, and denunciations, arrange for reinforcements, and 
give out the following day’s orders. That completed the broad 
I outlines of military organization. Now it would all depend on 

VJ2 



'noil utd eoduraopfr to get tl^ags ^ng. Gaimel, map in hand, 
discussed the disposal of his thirtc^ sections defence. 
Three of these required larger garrisons— the others were 
mainly strong observation posts, for which, provisionally, one 
or faa^ a decad sufficed. To the trenches and rock barricades 
of the North Saddle, on the other hand, Gabriel assigned a 
skeleton force of forty decads, with two hundred -rifles in good, 
repair. He himself was to command this important sector. 

immediate subordmate was Chaush Nurhan, to whom 
the command of the positions above the ilex gully and the 
task of geaerA inspection were entrusted. His responsible 
duties comprised espeaally the renewal of munitions and sup- 
plies and ^e proper care of rifles. Chaush Nurhan had the 
invaluable faculty of being in ten places at once, and had 
indeed made all his preparations for a workshop and cartridge 
factory. All the necessary tools and material had been carried 
up from his secret store in Yoghonoluk. All that now re- 
mained was the question who should command the South 
Bastion. The garrison of this most distant sector would be 
composed of fifteen decads. For reasons already stated, de- 
serters, both authentic and bogus, had been detailed off to 
make up this force — a very large one, considering the fortress 
strength of the point. Provisionally these men were being 
commanded by a reliable native of feeder Beg. But Bagradian 
pursued a definite object. Sarkis Kilikian was, after all, a gal- 
lant soldier, with very recent trench experience in the Caucasus. 
He was both intelligent and educated. He had suffered 
unheard-of cruelties from the Turks and, if he still had any- 
thing like a soul in him, it must be parched with an inhiiman 
thirst for revenge. Gabriel therefore intended to keep a sharp, 
provisional eye on Kilikian, and entrust him with this com- 
mand if he proved satisfactory. He hoped that this might not 
only release a valuable force, but give him full power over 
the deserters, unreliable people in the main. So, when the 
decads marched offi, he had kept back the Russian. All this 

303 



while Kiiikiaa had stood scrutinizing Gabriel, with a hind oi 
rigid detachment that seemed too bored even for insolence. 
This figure, emaciated by slavery in the oil fields, by jails, by a 
hundr^ gruesome adventures, clothed as it was in earthy rags, 
and the face like a young death’s-head stretched with tanned 
hide, looked aristocratic, imposing, in spite of everything. Since 
he never once turned his light, contemptuous, observant eyes 
away from Bagradian, he may have sensed a kind of respect 
even in this pampered, well-dressed “boss.” Perhaps he mistook 
for simple fear what in reahty was the tribute to his own in- 
describable fate and the strength that had managed to sur- 
mount it. But his very inkling of a fear, in conjunction with 
the appearance of this bourgeois, who could never in all his 
life have known a second’s real want, degradation, terror, 
aroused all the malice in Kilikian. Bagradian called sharply, 
like an officer, to him: 

“Sarkis Kilikian, report to me in two hours, in the north 
trenches. I’ve got a job for you.” 

The Russian’s eyes (he had sull not turned them away from 
Bagradian) took on the dull shimmer of an agate. He re- 
plied with a jerky laugh: “I may come, and agam I mayn’t. 
I really don’t know what I’d care to do.” 

Gabriel knew that everything would depend on his reply. 
He must make quite sure of his rank. His authority would 
be gone for ever if he struck the wrong note, or fate went 
against him. They were all listening eagerly; many a hidden, 
unholy joy flared up. Gabriel had made for himself a uniform, 
out of a hunting-kit, scarcely worn, which had belonged to 
Avetis. With It he wore leggings and a sun-helmet. This he 
put on before bearing down, in slow, swinging steps, upon 
the Russian. The helmet made him taller by half a head. He 
struck at his leggings with a cane. 

“Listen to me, Sarkis KiUkian — and keep your ears wide 
open.” 

His approach had been so direct that it forced the Russian a 

304 



scq> bade. Bagradian paused. His heart was thudding; he 
could feel that his voice was not quite steady. This good luck 
he conceded his opponent. He waited, therefore, never taking 
his eyes oil this death’s-head, till he could fill to overflowing 
with clear, cold will-power. 

"I myself give you leave, Kilikian, to do whatever you think 
you must. But bdore you leave here, you'll have to have made 
up your mind. . . . You’re free. You can go to the devil, no 
one’s keeping you. People of your sort are the very last we need 
in this camp.” 

Gabriel paused, as though expecting Sarkis Kilikian to 
avail himself immediately of this permission and slouch off in 
his usual slow, contemptuous way without another glance at 
the Damlayik. But the Russian stood rooted. An inquisitive 
glint had found its way into the dead, agate shimmer of his 
eyes. 

Bagradian’s voice became coldly pitying: “I intended to dis- 
tinguish you, who’ve been a soldier, from your comrades, by 
entrusting you with a post of leadership, since I know you’ve 
had more to bear from the Turks than most of us. You might 
have taken bloody revenge on your own behalf, and on theirs. 
. . . But — since you really don’t know whether you’ll care to 
— since you’re really nothing but a skulking coward of a de- 
serter, who can’t even see his duty to his own people, after 
having taken a solemn oath — get outi We don’t need a 
slacker, an insolent hound, eating the food of our wives and 
children. If you ever dare show yourself here again. I’ll have 
you shot. Go over to the Turks. Their regiments will soon 
be here. They’re expecting you.” 

For such a man as the Russian there should really have been 
nothing left after this but to rush on this “capitalist” and bash 
his face in. But Sarkis Kihkian never moved. His eyes lost 
their staring calm and strayed from man to man in search 
of supporters. 

Gabriel let five seconds elapse, seconds which raised his 

305 



authority like a wave heknfic bdOowing wtdt uxueatrsuneii 
harshness: "You seem to have made up your mind. Wcfl~ 
quick march. Get along.” 

It was curious how this sudden cracking of the whip could 
transform the Russian into the old jail-bird he was. His head 
sagged down between his shoulders, his sulky eyes gbwered 
up at Gabriel, now much the taller of the two. Kihkian’s whole 
weakness lay in the clarity with which he could estimate 
his position. He was fully conscious that this was a moment 
of nauseating defeat — ^yet all violence depends on a spirit so 
drunk with hate that the will is not lamed by a previous calcu- 
lation of consequences. For months he had lived secure on 
Musa Dagh. He had begged enough to eat in the villages. This 
general migration on to the heights came as an unforeseen 
improvement in his condition. But, should he get turned out 
of camp, his last chance of finding human sustenance would 
have vanished. He would not dare show himself in the valley, 
while even the surrounding hill-country would be invested, 
in a hand’s turn, by the Turks. Death, which had so often 
passed by him carelessly, might snap him up. The least he 
could expect from the Turks would be to be flayed alive, killed 
by inches. All this had flashed, in the fracuon of a second, 
upon Kilikian, and neither his pride, his hate, nor his defiance 
prevailed against such certain consciousness. He attempted 
another laugh, but could manage only a piteously degraded 
sneer. 

Gabriel did not budge an inch: “Well? What arc you still 
hanging about for?” 

Sarkis Kilikian’s face, the cowering face of an old convict^ 
turned. “I want . . .” 

“Well . . . ?” 

The Russian looked up, but with different eyes, no longer 
of a pale untroubled agate, but the eyes of a hesitating school- 
boy. Gabriel had to remember the boy of eleven, with a 
carving-kmfe in his hand, shielding his mother. It was some 

306 



#se li^lare ib smtoaocc faff-tkEnt;} 

want to «tajr." ' 

Gabriel refiected. Would it not be as well to force this 
re^citrant to his knees, make him whine out his petition be- 
fore the assembled decads, and oblige him to take a more 
rigorous oath? He decided against it, not merely out of pity 
(his vision of the boy of eleven) but because his deepest in- 
sinct forbade. It would have been beneath any leader’s dignity 
to make too much of this puny victory, and unwise to burden 
his own defence with the hate of a profoundly humbled 
enemy. He allowed a tinge of kindness to creep into his 
cheer’s growl: “This time I don’t mind letting you oil, Kilik- 
jan, and rU watch your behaviour for a bit. But you aren’t 
worth the slightest responsibdity. Look outi You’ll be under 
surveillance. Dismiss!” 

So the South Bastion was to be manned only half by de- 
setters. As Kilikian’s insolence had shown, they needed a 
martinet in command of them. A poisoned thorn would have 
to be driven into their flesh. Bagradian felt certain that in 
Oskanian, the self-opinionated dwarf, he had found the right 
kind of commander. So he offered that sombre little school- 
master the leadership of the South Bastion. He was to enforce 
impeccable service, the sharpest discipline— was, above all,* 
instantly to report the most trifling slackness or sabotage. 

Hrand Oskanian puckered his low forehead, so- that his 
thick, black eyebrows formed a single line above his nose. 
He appeared to be magnanimously considering whether this 
half pedagogic, half punitive pb was beneath so considerable 
a man. At last he stated his conditions: “If I’m to take charge 
of the South Bastion, I must be very well armed, Bagradian 
EfEendL The fellows’ll have to see I’m not to be trifled with.” 

So Teacher Oskanian arranged with Chaush Nurhan that 
he was to be given, not only a rifle with a double belt of five 
cartridges, but a huge holster-pistol and a luge^ broad-bladed 
fascine-knife. Thus, armed-to the teeth, he hurried o& to Three- 

307 



Tent Square, where he advanced ponqt&usly on Juliette t» 
announce his rank. He did not deign a glance at Gonzague 
Maris, convinced that this smooth-tongued weakling would 
vanish at the sight of him— the warrior. 

During this first day on Musa Dagh work on the trenches ad- 
vanced so well that there was every hope of completing all 
the essential defences before sunset. This fever of Industry so 
enthralled them that past and future ahke were forgotten in 
laughter and songs. 

The morale of the Town Enclosure turned out to be far less 
satisfactory. Ter Haigasun and Pastor Aram had their work 
cut out to deal with the crop of problems that arose. Gabriel’s 
suggested solution, at the first sitting of the council, of that 
major problem, private property, had already displeased the 
mukhtars and the rich. But now these hard-headed peasants 
saw for themselves that no life would be possible on the 
Damlayik without communal ownership of the herds. So and 
so many sheep must be slaughtered daily, by precise regulation 
of supplies, and therefore it would be quite impossible to 
consider individual owners of flocks. Every reasoning person 
could also see that the slaughtering must be done by com- 
munal butchers on ground set apart; that the delegates of the 
Council of Leaders must superintend the daily distribution of 
meat to decads and families, unless there were to be injustice, 
and so, dangerous discontent. Since one thing leads to an- 
other, the mukhtars had at last been got to consent even to 
a communal kitchen. And this was still not enoughi Their 
duty demanded that not only should they provide these com- 
mon necessities, but should supervise their distribution, and 
make them palatable. Such recent converts found it no easy 
matter to struggle to establish a social order whose ingrained 
opponents they were themselves. The housing question was 
solved more easily. Ter Haigasun had always insisti-H rhar 
too rigid and constricting a community, from which thwig 

308 



could be no escape^ would seem imnatural, and be bound 
sooner or later to bring its own nemesis. To adapt oneself 
with the minimum of friction to a new day-to-day life — 
such was the formula which he championed. So that living- 
quarters were to be made as extensive as possible. Even to- 
morrow, as soon as hands and tools could be spared from 
trench-building, Tomasian senior was to start work on the 
new settlement of huts, 'to be built of branches as designed 
by Aram. There were about a thousand families on the 
Damlayik, so that a thousand of such huts were intended, 
planned according to the numbers each must contain. There 
was abundant wood, to be cut down. Gabriel, even today, had 
released a certain number of men for tree-felling. 

All this was hard, but the real difhculties only began with 
bread and flour. Here, in view of the urgent necessity to econ- 
omize, Ter Haigasun was implacably communist. Every sack 
of grain which single famdies still possessed — oats, bulgur, 
maize, potatoes — all that they had baked in their own ovens 
and laboured to carry up the mountain must be surrendered 
without mercy. Out of this communal store, at the mormng 
distribution of meat, each family would receive a minute ra- 
tion. And not only flour was to be sequestered, but salt, coffee, 
tobacco, rice, spices — all the precious things which careful 
housewives, with the greatest labour and wisest foresight, had 
got together for their own use. Opposition to this drastic 
decree continued for hours. At last Aram Tomasian and the 
mukhtars, by prayers and curses, had got so far that a few of 
the more virtuous fathers of families reluctantly set out for 
the depot, with their bread and flour, their coffee and tobacco. 
These confiscated goods of the people were classified and ar 
ranged there for distribution. Sudi exemplary self-sacrifice 
brought imitators, till, little by httle, spurred on by shame 
(since the open camp afforded no means of concealment), the 
majority followed. Sacks of flour and maize were pil^ up 
one beside the other. Old Tomasian was commissioned to 

VQ 



b)i^, early next morning, a roof for protection owt tbeae 
stores. Five armed guards were posted round the depot Ter 
Haigasun chose these five from the poorest families in the 
villages. 

Ter Haigasun, Gabriel, and the Council had planned, with* 
out self-deceiving optimism, against the annihilation of Musa 
Dag^ from all four quarters of the globe. But one danger- 
spot had so far escaped their calculations. And so, shortly be- 
fore sunset on the following day, it was just this quarter that 
delivered an irreparable onslaught the effects of which were 
never to be made good. That day the work was going better 
and better, if only because the sun was overcast. It refrained 
from slanting its grilling rays across the bent backs of these 
poor robots, and no one was forced to seek shelter. But al- 
though the sun was covered, there was not a cloud in the 
whole sky, nor was it any cooler than yesterday. The air was 
saturated in some composition of dreary mist some hog-wash 
rinsings of the universe, surrounding the world like an un- 
clean conscience; instead of the blazing heat sultriness lay 
mountainous over all things. The sea was glassy; from time 
to time a hot puff of wind came from the west, without ever 
rippling its firm surface. Yet, for all its heavy immobility, 
from midday onwards surf kept leaping upon the rocks, widi 
more strength, more suppressed anger, each minute. The work- 
ers, their minds fast set on their own care and labour, had 
paid no heed to the evil squintings of the sky. So that the sud- 
den deluge fully achieved its aim. Four, five gusts of rattling 
wind, like a short ultimatum of war. The whole Damlayik— 
every rock, every tree, every myrtle and rhododendron busl^ 
became alert with terror. A terrific thunder-clap — ^war waa 
declared! And already this southern storm, bristling with 
flashes, and itself as swift as any lightning, swept on to the 
attack, enveloping all things in its stifling thicknesses of dust. 
Mats, coverlets, beds, cushions, white sheets, headkerchiefs, pots 
and jugs, lamps, heavy things, lig^t things, clattered and 

310 



nniicd port oite aocMlier, were upset, catig^ up^ and swept 
away^-llK peo^ lifting up their voices, phased malevcdendy 
fugitive gear, ran into one another’s arms, trod one another’s 
goods into the soil. This noise of assault drowned the wailing 
voices of many babes, who had all seemed to sense the deeper 
meaning of this celestial thrashing on their first day. Almost 
at once this mad chase of vanishing possessions was cast to 
earth by such a hailstorm as few among these mountaineers 
could remember. After vain efforts to stand up to it; many 
lay down flat on the steaming earth, offering their backs to 
the bastinadoing skies. They bit the ground. They longed to 
perish. A sudden shout— the munition dumpl But luckily 
Gabriel Bagradian had had the cartridges moved into the 
sheikh’s tent, while Chaush Nurhan had found means for 
keeping the loose gunpowder dry. Provisions! came the second 
thought. The men rushed shouting to the grain depot. Too 
late! The flat cakes were reduced to a sticky mass, the loaves 
to eviscerated sponges. All the meal-sacks steamed hke slaking 
lime. This destruction was a very serious matter. Most of the 
salt had melted into the ground. Many began to think of that 
ageold threat, that on Judgment Day a man shall pick up 
with his eyelids whatever salt he has spilt during his life. 
This disaster made them cease to struggle. Drenched to their 
skins, whipped with hailstones, they huddled on the marshy 
earth, indifferent to the deluging clouds which poured down 
swathes an inch thick. Not even their women complained and 
yammered. Everyone wrapped himself up in brooding soli' 
tude, nursing unutterable wrath against Ter Haigasun and the 
Council, who had this food depot on their consciences, this 
thrice-accursed order to give up stores. Nothing so much re- 
lieves the pent-up breast of a human being as to make indi- 
viduals responsible for a natural disaster and heap reproaches. 
Ncm: did ^e glowering folk on the Damlayik consider, till 
long after this, that disaster was in no way the result of Ter 
Haigasun’s command to deliver supplies, since in private hands 



it would have been just as impossible to rescue them. In the 
minds of these peasants Heaven seemed, by this punishment^ 
to make manifest its wrathful dislike of communal ownership, 
its championship of private property. The converted mukhtars, 
with squinting Thomas Kebussyan at their head, relapsed at 
once to their first persuasion. They mingled their growls with 
the reproaches which now assailed the priest from every side. 

Ter Haigasun, as the rain ceased, stood with bent head, 
confronting their fierce hostility, his cassock clinging to his 
body, the drops pouring off his beard. Bread and Hour were 
utterly spoiled. The priest could not escape the terrible question 
why God, within the space of ten minutes, should have 
thought fit to confound the human reckonings of innocent and 
persecuted men. And this before the end of their first day on 
Musa Dagh! The sun sank in )agged mountains of crimson, 
obhvious of the whole incident. Birds sang on till the last in- 
stant of light, as though they were making up for lost time. 
All the humans had been struck dumb. Men, women, chil- 
dren, wandered half naked past one another. Housewives tied 
ropes between the trees and hung up the dripping clothes to 
dry. Nobody wanted to sit on the ground, though, before the 
moon was up, this thirsty soil had sucked in its last gout of 
moisture. None the less the campfire would not burn, since 
thick drops still clung to the logs and faggots. Single families 
squatted, bunched together, turning ill-tempered backs on 
their next-door neighbours. They must manage to sleep on the 
bare earth, since mattresses, coverlets, cushions could not pos- 
sibly be dry till tomorrow night. But they slept in heaps. In 
misfortune one body needed another to touch, each grief tc 
make quite certain of its neighbour. 

Pastor Aram Tomasian sat in an observation post which th< 
scouts’ division had set up in the branches of a very wide and 
shady oak. From this point one could get a clear view of thi 
church square and village street of the large village of Bitiai 



Tlte pastor had borrowed Bagradian's field-glass, so that the 
dust-swept square and road were clearly visible. Nokhudian’s 
band of Protestants stood in marching order, outside the 
church. There seemed a surprising number of them; many of 
his co-religionists must secretly have gone over to Nokhudian. 
Surprise at finding every nest of Armenians empty as far as 
Bitias may have caused the mudirand the police chief to hold 
back their convoy from Saturday to this present Sunday. 
Saptiehs were scurrying in and out, brandishing their 
truncheons or guns. Impossible to. make out exactly which. A 
distant zigzag of tiny shapes. Perhaps the gendarmes were al- 
ready striking right and left But no sounds of pain or rage 
drifted so far. Distance had toned down any horror to a 
framed, faintly animated miniature. Tomasian had to make a 
conscious efiort to realize that this was not a puppet-show 
which he watched so detachedly through the round end of his 
glass, but his own destiny. He might tell himself again and 
again that he had escaped from among the outcasts who down 
there m the dust-clouds of the valley were setting forth on their 
road to death, only to prolong his own earthly life by a few 
days. Up here, among oak leaves, the shade was so pleasant. 
Rest and comfort filled him from top to toe. The reality of that 
horror below him was being dispersed in tiny movements, 
which teased the eye, but left the heart more indifferent than 
any dream. Pastor Tomasian started, as he realized his own 
cold-hearted guilt. Down there was his place, and not up here! 
He thought of the mission house in Marash. The Reverend 
Mr. Woodley, sent him by God to test his heart, posed again 
his enigmatic quesuon: “Can you help those children by dying 
with them?” The trap was set. But later, over there in Bitias, 
he had let slip his chance a second time, of adding to the pains 
by which he must bear witness to Christ. 

It was a long, a painfully long while, before the convoy, with 
his old, yet so much juster brother in God, Nokhudian, began 
to move ofi. And the freckled mudir seemed c<;rtainly to have 

313 



tnade a few concessions. A line of sumpter mules walked in 
the train, the rear of which was even facing followed by two 
carts, their high wheels jolting through the dust-cloud. Pastor 
Aram saw what he had seen so often in those last seven days 
in Zeitun: a sick, worming line of human beings, feeble to the 
point of extinction; a blackish caterpillar, with tremulous 
feelers, bristles, and tiny feet, winding its piteous length 
through the landscape, without ever seeming to advance. This 
mortally wounded, forsaken insect seemed to seek in vain for 
a place to hide in, among the open windings of the valley. Its 
peristaltic back thrust forward the foremost sections of its 
body, drawing the rear ones painfully after it. So that deep 
notches kept bemg formed, and often the creeping insect got 
split up into several parts which, urged by scarcely visible tor- 
menters, grew jaggedly together, as best they might, to break 
once more when the join had scarcely healed. It was not the 
wriggle, it was the twitching death throes, of a worm, a last, 
writhing, stretching, convulsive shudder, as though already 
carrion flies were creeping up to the open wound. 

It seemed almost to be a miracle that, httle by little, a gap 
should form between this worm and the last houses of the 
village, through which it dragged so unbearably slow a way, 
“They have several pregnant women,” Aram reflected. The m- 
stant thought of Hovsannah weighed on his heart. By various 
signs it was apparent that his wife was very near her time. 
Nothing had been done, or could have been done, to help her. 
So that his first child would be born as roughly as any beast on 
Musa Dagh. Bad as this was, a deep presentiment burdened 
Tomasian still more heavily — a fear lest this child in its 
mother’s womb should have to suffer for his sin. He lowered 
his field-glass and, suddenly giddy, clung with both arms to 
the solid prongs of the fork within which he was sitting. 
When, after a while, he looked again, the mimature in the 
telescope had changed. Now the worm was wrigg ling on 
through Azir, the silk village. And a party of saptiehs had de- 



tached itsdf and was marching north-east, away firom Bhias, 
towards Kebussiye. Pastor Aram sent instant warning to head* 
quarters. The danger soon passed. The saptiehs did not whed 
in the direction of the Nor^ Saddle of the Damlayik, but dis* 
appeared up the rising ground at the foot of the valley. They 
were on the wrong track, thanks to Nokhudian. The country 
lay quiet. A few hundred Moslems were prowling the squares 
and streets of empty villages — ^mohajirs from the north*west^ 
brought by the scent of booty, and the native riffraff of the 
plain. This scum still seemed not to have possession of the 
houses. Perhaps some government order had dulled its ap* 
petite. These gentry buzzed, hke indolent horseflies, along 
the streets. The saptieh detachment was lost to sight, eastwards, 
down a side valley, before it bad come as far as Kebussiye-* 
another proof of how it had been outwitted. The sudden hope 
— ^perhaps we'll be left in peace for days . . . perhaps the 
Turks will leave Musa Dagh on their left for ever. 

Pastor Aram jumped down from his spying-post. Wood- 
cutters’ hatchets rang out on every side, in the dark groves. 
If he had not been able to prove himself God’s priest, let him 
at least prove himself God’s soldier. He almost ran the whole 
way bade into camp, in his haste not to miss an instant’s duty. 

The camp looked incredibly industrious. Long lines of bur- 
dened donkeys, piled high with heavy loads of oak branches, ' 
nodded past young Tomasian. Great stones for laying founda- 
tions were being trundled by on wheelbarrows. Father Tomas- 
ian’s assistants were measuring out streets with lines of cord 
and marking off the spaces for the huts. Already, here and 
there, there had arisen the vague scaffolding of a hutment. 
Families competed in speed. Children, and even the very old, 
worked beside the strongest men and women. The “pub- 
lic buildings” were already surprisingly far advanced — the 
hospital-tent, under Bedros Altouni’s supervision, and the big 
granary. But Father Tomasian in person supervised the gov- 

315 



BrffflMsnt barrack, a work, on which he had set his heart. It 
covered a wide space, with two side-cabins, provided with 
doors that could lx locked. 

Meanwhile Juliette had installed herself in Three-Tent 
Square. Gabriel had expressly begged her to think of nothing 
and of nobody but herself, not even of him. He had brought 
up the matter for discussion at a Council sitting: “My wife 
has the right to lead her own life, even up here, on the Dam- 
layik. She must live here just as she chooses. We others are of 
the same blood and so arc subject to laws on which we’ve all 
of us decided. But she remains outside our laws. She’s French 
—the child of a more fortunate people, although she’s com- 
pelled by fate to share our dangers. And therefore she has the 
right to our most generous hospitality.” 

All the members of the Council of Leaders had responded 
to Bagradian’s appeal. The three tents exclusively reserved 
for Juliette, the heaps of luggage, her special kitchen and 
separate household, her tinned food, her two Dutch cows, 
bought by Avetis the younger— all these exceptional posses- 
sions and special privileges would have to be made acceptable 
to the people. Gabriel had indeed given orders that most of 
the milk was to be distributed among the children of the 
camp, with whatever else could be spared from Juliette’s 
kitchen. But these were very minor concessions, which left her 
still a highly privileged person. 

Enemies, or ill-disposed friend^ to demonstrate the gap be- 
tween precept and practice, needed only to point to Juliette’s 
luxury when Gabrid urged the necessity for a careful shanng- 
out of supplies. They could not have denied that their leader 
did not sleep in a tent, but at his post; that he drew the samr; 
rations as all his men; that his property had gone into the 
general pool and been of the greatest advantage to the com- 
munity— however, it remained equally undeniable rbat, for 
Juliette’s sake, he withheld a great many luxuries from the 
common stock. This discrepancy might foster dangerous con- 

316 



fficts. But at present none of the leaders seemed to be thinking 
anything of the kmd. 

And yet, not an hour before, the mayor of Yoghonoluk had 
had to submit to an acid lecture from his wife on the subjea 
of Three-Tent Square. Wasn’t sh^ the pupil of the Missionary 
Sisters at Marash, as much a lady as this Frenchwoman? Was 
she so very much beneath her that she had to live, just like 
all the common village women, in a wretched hut made of 
branches^ And was he, her husband, Thomas Kebussyan, 
really such a poor httle worm that now there was no differ- 
ence between him and any beggarly Dikran or Mikael, whereas 
the difference was so immense between him and that inflated 
Bagradian? These wifely exhortations ended m Kebussyan’s 
slyly contriving that he and his family should not have to live 
in a draughty hut, but in a spacious log-house, especially built 
for them, close to the altar. That no bad blood might be 
caused by this stately edifice, the mukhtar had made up his 
mind to hang out a sign over the door, with the inscription 
“Town Hall.” So that, remembering his intended ruse, he 
nodded approvingly to Bagradian’s appeal on behalf of Juhette. 

Ter Haigasun looked Gabnel full in the face before lower- 
ing his eyes, as he always did when he was speaking: “Gabriel 
Bagradian, we ail hope your wife may escape, even if sooner 
or later the rest of us perish. May she say a good word for ^ 
us to the French.” 

Juliette lived in one of the two hunting-tents. She had asked 
Hovsannah and Iskuhi to share the second. Hovsannah, in 
sombre anxiety, awaited her child. In the sheikh-pavilion, half 
of which was used for stores and luggage, there were three 
beds. Stephan slept in one, the second belonged to Samuel 
Avakian, who, however, as staff-officer and adjutant, always 
passed his nights within reach of Bagradian. Smee the latter 
had curtly renounced all comfortable living, Juhette placed 
the third bed in the sheikh-tent at Gonzague Maris’s disposal 
She &lt under some obligation to that young man h>r the very 

317 



discreet homage with which he surrounded her, especisdly in 
these last, trying days. He had saved Gabriel’s h&. Also he was 
the one European, besides herself, on the Damlayik. There 
were many moments when this bond between them grew so 
intense that they eyed each other like conspirators, prisoners 
in the same jail. Jidiette felt a dangerous inclination to slack- 
ness. Gonzague was still dressed out of a bandbox. She came 
upon him sometimes unawares, brushmg a suit, with scru- 
pulous care, outside the tent, sewing on a button, pohshing 
shoes. His nails were always clean, his hands well cared for; 
he shaved, in contrast to Gabriel, every day. Yet this scrupu- 
lous care of himself suggested no particular vanity, seemed 
rather to be an active dislike of whatever was soiled or ill 
defined. A spot on his clothes, mud on his shoes, would cause 
Gonzague real unhappiness. It was as though by nature he 
could not tolerate anything fusty or half unconscious, as 
though, if he were to live at all, it must all be raised into the 
light of a clear purpose of his own. This meticulous approach 
to life, which refused to give way before any circumstance, 
impressed Juliette. All the less intelligible, therefore, Gon- 
zague’s plaad decision to share the death of a set of foreigners. 

Once, when he had not been near her all day, she routed 
him out: “Have you begun to write your descriptive articles?” 

He watched her, surprised, and yet half quizzical. “I never 
take notes. My memory is my only real asset. I shan’t need to 
save a few smudged papers.” 

The young man’s cocksureness annoyed her. “It remains to 
be seen if you’ll manage to save your head — ^memory and all.” 

He answered with a short laugh; really he was expressing 
a deep conviction: “You don’t surely imagine, Juliette, that 
Turkish soldiers, or anything else, could prevent my leaving 
this if I really wanted to?” 

Both this and the tone in which he said it displeased Juliette. 
This decisive biding of his time which Gonzague so often let 
her see in him rep^ed her. But there were other moments at 

318 



which he could seem as lost as a stray child. Then a motherly 
pity would well up in her. And it did her good. 

Near Three-Tent Square, beyond the beeches, Kristaphor 
and Missak had set up a table with benches. This nook was as 
charmi ngly peaceful as though it had been the remote corner 
of a garden with alleys all round it, not part of an inaccessible 
mountain camp. Here of an afternoon sat Juliette, with Iskuhi 
and Hovsannah, receiving her guests. 

Usually these callers were the same as those who had fre- 
quented Villa Bagradian. Krikor was a regular visitor, and 
the teachers, whenever they happened to be off duty. Hapeth 
Shatakhian did his uttermost, as he expressed it, “to delight 
Madame by the purity of his French conversation.” But Oskan- 
lan had ceased to appear as the maestro of poetry and callig- 
raphy; he was now a fierce and impassioned warrior. For 
“afternoon calls” he still always wore his grey “milord’s” 
morning-coat; under it he had slung his trench-knife to a belt, 
out of which the butt of a saddle-pistol fearsomely lowered. 
He would neither lay aside his weapons nor remove his martial 
lambskin kepi. 

Juliette “received” not only gentlemen; the wives of the 
notables also frequented her. Mairik Antaram, the doctor’s 
lady, came in whenever she had the time; the mukhtar’s wife, 
Madame Kebussyan, less frequently, though when she did her 
alert curiosity was insatiable. Madame Kebussyan insisted onr 
seeing all there was to see. Almost vuth tears in her eyes she 
begged Juliette to show her the inside of the sheikh’s pavilion 
— the rubber tubs, the dinner-sets, the furniture which could 
be taken to bits, the expensive cabin-trunks. With the deepest, 
most prescient emotion, she stuck her nose into chests of sup- 
plies, airing her opinions on sardine-tins, patent foods, soap, 
and sugar. Juliette could manage to rid herself of this worthy 
lady, whose quick, mouse eyes ferreted in and out of every 
corner, only by offering her gifts out of the stores, a tin of food, 
a cake of chocolate. Then Madame Kebussyan’s thanks, and 

3>9 



promises of fiddity to her £ri£hd, exceeded even hei^ praise of 
all these good things. 

Mairik Antaram, on the other hand, never came without 
bringing a small gift, a pot of honey, a cake of “apricot- 
leatbtf,” that reddish brown fruit preserve, indispensable to 
the Armenian breakfast table. She bestowed her gift secretly. 
“When they’re gone, djanik, little soul— you eat this. It’s good. 
You shan’t have to go without things while you’re with us.” 

But often Mairik Antaram would look very sadly at Juliette, 
through her fearless, and never self-pitying, eyes: “If only 
you’d stayed at home, my prettyl” 

IsKUHi Tomasian saw less of Juliette on the Damlayik than 
she had in the villa in Yoghonoluk. She had asked Ter Haig- 
asun to use her as assistant schoolteacher, and the priest had 
welcomed the suggesuon. 

Juliette scorned this resolve: “Why, my dear, when we’d 
just begun to make you really well again, do you want to go 
off and work yourself to shreds? Whatever for? Placed as we 
are, it seems ridiculous.” 

Juliette was still in the strangest relationship to Iskuhi. She 
seemed, by dint of the many acts of kindness which she had 
shown her from the very first, to have conquered, one after 
the other, both that stubborn shyness and eagerness to be of 
use, behind which the real Iskuhi was hiding. Iskuhi had even 
shown signs of shyly returning this affection. When they said 
good-morning or good-night, she would put her arms round 
this elder friend. But Juliette could feel distincdy that these 
tendresses were mere imitations, adjustments, just as in speak- 
ing a foreign language we may offen use its idioms without 
really knowing their shade of meamng. Iskuhi’s hardness, the 
centre crystal of her being, that whi^ was for ever strange 
in her, remained untouched by all endearments. And it cannot 
be denied that Juliette suffered at this soul’s impregnability, 
since every wound inflicted on her sense of power seemed to 

320 



infect her whole estimate of herself. Even this business of 
‘^teaching school” meant a defeat for her. 

Now Iskuhi spent many hours a day on what was known 
as the “School Slope," far removed from Three-Tent Square. 
There was a big blackboard, an abacus, a map of the Ottoman 
empire, and quantities of spelling books and readers. Several 
hundred benches. A whole army squatted, sat, or lay in the 
shade of a clearing, filling the air with shrill sparrow chirrup- 
ings. Since usually the whole male teaching-staff was on duty 
in the trenches or in camp, Iskuhi would often be left for 
hours at the mercy of rampaging brats. To keep order, or 
even establish peace, among four- to twelve-year-old savages 
was impossible. Iskuhi had not the strength to take up the 
struggle. Soon she would cease to hear her own voice and 
wait, resigned, for the arrival of some trusty male pedagogue, 
say Oskaman, to scare the little devils to wan submission. 
That teacher, iron militarist that he was, strode in among 
them rifle in hand, since by military law he had now the right 
to shoot them all for insubordination in the field. The switch 
he carried, in addition to ail his other accoutrements, swished 
round the shoulders of guilty and innocent indiscriminately. 
One unlucky group was put to kneel on pointed stones, an- 
other to stand for fifteen minutes with heavy objects held above 
its heads. After which Oskanian would leave his female sub-/ 
ordinate to enjoy the fruits of his pedagogic method — a deathly 
silence. 

Juliette saw at once that these strenuous efforts were very 
bad for Iskuhi’s looks. Her checks had begun to lose their 
colour, her face was peaked, her eyes as huge as when she 
had first emerged from the hell of the convoy. And Juliette 
strove with all her might to rid Iskuhi’s heart of its zeal for 
duty. She only managed to shock and puzzle her. How, in this 
crisis of her whole people, could she shirk so absurdly easy a 
task? On the contraryl She wanted more work for the af^- 
noons. Juliette turned her back on her. 

521 



At present Juliette spent half the day lying on her bed. The 
narrow tent stifled her. Two pestering sunbeams forced their 
way through chinks in the canvas door. She had not the 
energy to get up and cover them. “I shall be ill,” she hoped. 
“Oh, if I were only ill already.” Her pounding heart threat- 
ened to burst, with unassuageablc longings — ^longings for Ga- 
briel. But not for the present Gabriel — no! For Gabriel the 
— Paristen, that sensitive, gentle, and considerate Gabriel, whose 
tact had always made her forget the things which are not to 
be bridged over. She longed for the Gabriel of the Avenue 
Kleber, in their sunny flat, sitting down good-temperedly to 
lunch. Her distant world enveloped her in its sounds: its hoot- 
ing cars, the subterranean rattle of the Metro, its delicious, 
chattering bustle; the scents of its familiar shops. She buried 
her face in the pillow, as though it were the one thing left, 
the one handsbreadth of home that remained to her. She was 
seeking herself in its odorous softness, striving with all her 
senses to hold fast to these fugitive memories of Paris. But she 
did not succeed. Rotating splotches of sunbeam forced them- 
selves in, between closed lids. Coloured disks with, in the 
centre of each, a piercing eye — eyes that reproached and suf- 
fered, forcing themselves in on her from all sides; Gabriel’s 
and Stephan’s Armenian eyes, which would not let go of her. 
When she looked up, the eyes were really bending over her, 
in the wildly bearded face of a strange man. She stared in 
alarm at Gabriel. He seemed remote, his nights all spent out 
of doors, the reek of damp earth clinging to him. His voice 
was the hurried voice of a man between two urgent duties. 

“Arc you all right, cherie.? Nothing you want.? I’ve just 
looked in to see how you’re getting on.” 

“I’m all right — thank you.” 

She offered him a dream-enveloped hand. For a while he 
sat next her, saying nothing, as though there was nothing they 
could discuss. Then he stood up. 

But she sat up irritably. “Do you really think me so empty, 

322 



so materialist, that you only ever need worry about externals?” 

He did not und^and at once. She sobbed: “I can’t go on 
living like this.” 

He turned back with a very serious face. “I quite see you 
can’t bve like this, Juliette. One just can’t live in a commu- 
nity, when one puts oneself entirely apart from it. You ought 
to do something. Go into the camp, try to help. Be humanl” 

“It’s not my community.” 

“Nor mine as much as you seem to imagine, Juliette. We 
belong far less to what we’ve come from than to what we’re 
doing our best to reach.” 

“Or not to reach,” she wept. 

When he had gone, Juliette pulled herself together. Perhaps 
he was right. It really couldn’t go on like this. She begged 
Mairik Antaram to ask the doaor to let her work in the hos- 
pital hut. The thought that a thousand Frenchwomen were 
doing the same, at that very minute, for their wounded, helped 
her to come to this decision. At first the old doctor jibbed, 
then he accepted her. Juliette, that very same day, made her 
first appearance in the hut (it was still in process of being 
built) suitably attired in coif and apron. There were luckily 
very few cases of serious illness on the Damlayik. One or two 
fever patients swathed in rags lay on mats and cushions, still 
stiff with damp from the recent storm. They were mostly 
very old people. Grey, mysterious faces, already half out of th^ 
world. “Not my sort,” felt Juhettc, with a certain pity, a vast 
repugnance. She could see how unsuited she was to such 
works of mercy. It was as though she had been lifted above 
herself. She had all the available bedding brought from the 
tents— anything she could possibly spare. 

Till midday, the fourth of August passed like the days that 
had preceded it. When in the early morning Gabriel scanned 
the vall^ with his field-glass, the villages looked quiet and 
deserted. It seemed almost a permissible thought that every- 

323 



would 'work oat smoothly, world peace be siguedi, aa4 
die return to normal life secured for them. So th a t, he left hb 
<d)servatioa post in quite a hopeful frame of mind, and went 
on from sector to sector on a surprise inspection of the work 
and discipline of the decads. Towards midday, entirely satis* 
fled, he returned to his own headquarters. A few minutes later 
scouts came running in from all sides. Report: a big dust-cloud 
on the road from Antioch to Suedia — ^lots and lots of soldiers 
—in four detachments— behind them sapdehs and a big crowd 
of peoplel . . . They were just turmng into the valley and 
already marching through Wakef, the first village. Gabriel 
dashed to the nearest observadon post and established the fol- 
lowing: the column of march of an infantry company at war 
strength was on its way down the village street. He recog- 
nized them at once as regulars, from the mounted captain who 
led them, and the fact that they were marching in four pla- 
toons, which seemed almost able to keep in step. They came 
swaying onwards. They must therefore be trained, and perhaps 
even front-line troops, garrisoned in the barracks of Antakiya, 
part of Jemal Pasha’s newly conditioned army. About two 
hundred sapdehs dribbled along, far behind the company, 
while the scum of the plains, the human dregs of Antioch, 
raised its dust on either side of this column of march. The 
advance of so war-like a condngent of nearly four hundred 
rifles, including the saptiehs, was carried out in such God- 
forsaken indifierence to exposure through this open country 
that Gabriel was inchned for a tune to think that these troops 
had another objeedve. Only when the column, after a short 
pause and oflicers’ consultadon, moved forward north-west, 
behind Bitias, into the mountains, was it quite certain that 
this was a campaign against the villagers. The Turks seemed 
to imagine that they were doing policemen’s work, less dan- 
gerous even than the usual hunt for deserters— that all they 
would have to do would be to surround an unarmed encamp- 
ment of miserable villagers, smoke them out, and herd them 

324 



into the valley. For such a task they must have felt super]** 
tively strong, as indeed they wne, when one considers that the 
Armenians only had a hundred good rifles, scarcely any muni- 
tions, and few trained men. By the time they were in Yog- 
hpnoluk, Gabriel had sounded the major shtm, practised 
daily with his decads and the camp. The munadirs, the drum- 
mers, gathered together the Town Enclosure. The orderly 
group of the cohort of youth went darting all over the moun- 
tain plateau with orders to the section-leaders. A few of these 
lads even ventured down into the valley, to find out the forma- 
tion and movements of the eiumy. Ter Haigasun, the seven 
mukhtars, the elder members of die council, stayed with the 
people, in the centre of the camp, as had been arranged. No 
one dared to breathe. Even babes m arms seemed to stifle their 
wailings. Reservists, armed with axes, mattocks, and spades, 
encircled the camp in a wide nng, to be ready in case they 
were wanted. Gabriel stood with Chaush Nurhan and the 
other leaders. The whole event had been foreseen. 

But, since this was a first enwunter, and no other point was 
directly menaced, he emptied his supports of all but their 
most necessary defenders, and threw every decad at his dis- 
posal into the trenches of the North Saddle. The system had 
four lines. First and foremost the main trench, which blocked 
the entrance to the Damlayik, on the uneven summit of th^, 
left slope of the Saddle. A few hundred yards behind it th2 
sebond trench, dug along very uneven ground. On the frontal 
side of slope, beyond the trenches, flank-protection, with thrust 
out sniping-posts. Finally, on the side facing the sea, the bar- 
ricades, luckily too high to see across, of jagged limestone 
rock. 

-About two hundred, armed with the best rifles and, it was 
to be hoped, the best of the fighters, manned the front-line 
trench. Bagradian himself was to lead them. Nor had he 
allowed Sarkis Kilikian, or any other deserter, into this garri- 
son. Men from carefully picked decads were placed under 



Chaus^ Nurhan, in the lodc barricades. Another two hun« 
dred stood in the second trench, ready in case things should 
go badly. Every Rghter received three sets of five cartridges — 
only fifteen bullets apiece. 

Bagradian insisted: “Not one unnecessary bullet. Even if the 
fighting lasts three days, you’ve all got to make your three 
cartridge-clips do. Save— or we’re done for. And— listen care- 
fully — this is the most important thing of all. No one to open 
fire without my orders. All keep your eye on me. We must let 
the Turks, who won’t even know we’re there, come on, till 
they’re ten paces off us. And then — aim steadily at the head, 
and fire steadily. And now, keep thinking of all the horrible 
things they’ve done to us. And of nothing else.” 

Gabriel’s heart, as he said it, beat so hard that his voice 
shook. He had to pull himself together to prevent their notic- 
ing. It was more than any excitement of coming battle; it was 
the clear knowledge of this crazy, monstrous defiance of the 
forces of a world-army by a handful of half-trained men. There 
was not a trace in him of hatred. He awaited an impersonal 
enemy, no longer the Turk, no longer Enver, Talaat, the police 
chief, the mudir— simply “the enemy,” whom one slaughters 
without hate. 

And, as Bagradian felt, so did ail the rest. Tension seemed to 
have stopped their very heartbeats when the boys came crawl- 
ing back out of the thickets and, with wild gestures, an- 
nounced the near approach of the Turks. This excitement 
froze at once to a glacial calm as the sound of infantry boots 
came nearer, over crackhng twigs, with bursts of most im- 
prudent noise, without any presacnce of danger in it. Little by 
little, puffing from the climb, their column of march broken 
up, the Turkish soldiers approached the Saddle. The captain 
in charge seemed quite persuaded that this was a job for the 
police. Otherwise he would surely not have neglected the 
most obvious precautionary measures, the basic tactical prin- 
ciples for a force in enemy country. Unshielded by any patrols, 

326 



advance guard, flank or rear protection, a disordered swarm 
of laughing, gossiping, smoking infantrymen had come strag> 
gling up, to collect on the ridge, and get their breaths after 
the climb. 

Chaush Nurhan crawled to Bagradian, down the trench, 
and tried, in a sharp, loud whisper, to persuade him to at- 
tack, surround the Turks, and cut them oif. But Gabriel, 
clenching his teeth, merely put a hand over Nurhan’s mouth, 
and pushed him away. Their captain, a stout, good-looking 
man, had taken oif his lambskin kepi, with the half-moon, and 
was dabbing up the sweat that streamed down his forehead. 
His heutenants collected round him. They stood disputing 
over a sketch-map, all arguing^ in rather unsoldierly fashion, 
as to the probable hiding-place of the wasps’ nest. Fiery eter- 
nities for Bagradian. The puffing captain would not so much 
as take the trouble to chmb the highest point and survey the 
terrain. At last he ordered his bugler to sound the “faU-in,” 
in several strident repetmons, no doubt in order to put the 
fear of Allah into cringing Armenians. The four lines formed 
up two deep, in extended order, as if on a barrack-square. The 
corporals dashed in front of the men and reported to the 
officers. A lieutenant drew his sword to report to the captain. 

Gabriel took a good look at this captain’s face. It was not 
an unpleasant one. It was a broad, friendly face, in gold- 
rimmed pince-nez, planted well up the nose. Now the cap^ 
tain, too, was drawing his sword and, in a high, weak voic^ 
giving his order: "Fix bayonets.” A clatter of nfles. The cap- 
tain twirled his sword once round his head, before thrusting 
its point towards the ridge of the Armenian Saddle. “First and 
second platoons, in extended order— follow me.” The senior 
lieutenant pointed his sword in the opposite direction: “Third 
and fourth platoons, in extended order— follow me.” So that 
|he Turks were not even certam whether the fugitives had en- 
camped on the Damlayik or the northern heights of Musa 
Dagh. The Armenians stood breast-high in their trenches. 

327 



The throwa*up escaipe ia frcmt ^ them, ia the cloti «£ wihii^ 
thejr rested guns, had been fully camouflaged, as had 
also the lines of visibility, hewn out in the undergitmth and 
knee-high grass which strewed the inchne. In ragged extended 
order the unwitung Turks toiled up the height The first-line 
trench was so brilliandy masked that it would have been per- 
ceptible only from a much higher observation point; a point 
winch, however, did not exist except in the tallest tree-tops of 
the counter-slope. Gabriel raised his hand, and drew all eyes 
in his direction. 

I The Turks were making slow progress through the under- 
growth. The captain had ht a fresh cigarette. Suddenly he 
started and stopped. What was the meaning of that turned-up 
soil, over there ? It was still a few seconds before it flashed upon 
him — that’s a trench. And it still seemed to him so incredible 
that again he delayed, before he shouted: “Get downi Take 
cover!’’ Too late. The first shot was already fired, and indeed 
before Bagradian’s hand had dropped for it. The Armenians 
fired reflectively, one after another, without exatement. They 
had time to aim. Each of them knew that not one cartridge 
must be wasted. And since their victims, rigid with surprise, 
were suU only .a few paces off them, not one bullet missed its 
mark. The stout captain with the good-natured face shouted 
again: “Down! Take cover.” Then he looked up in amaze- 
ment at the sky, and sat on the ground. His glasses tumbled 
off, before he sank over on his side. Disciphne suddenly broke 
in the Turkish ranks. The men, shouting wildly, ran down the 
sbpe again, leaving dead and wounded, among whom were 
the captain, a corporal, and -three onbashis. Gabriel did not 
fire. Suddenly he felt raised sJjove the earth. Reality around 
him had grown as unreal as it always is, in its truest essence. 

The Turks took a long time to collect themselves. Their 
officers and non-coms had a hard job to hold up the retreat. 
They had to chivvy back their protesting men with blows from 
the flats of their swords and rifle-butte. Meanwhile, the two 

3*8 



tanks bad tsdEca no &mvere advanced. But, instead of 
first discovering a practical line of attack, these riflemen sought 
thdr cover haphazard, behind bushes and blocks of stone, 
without the vaguest inkling of an Armenian trench almost 
under their rifles. A mad shower of spattering bullets was 
released from behind bushes and dwarf shrubs, which did the 
trench not the slightest damage. Only now and again did a 
stray shot ping over the heads of the defenders. 

Gabriel sent an order down the trench: “Don’t shoot. Take 
good cover. Wait till they come back.” 

At the same time he sent word to his flank positions; anyone 
daring to fire a shot, or even so much as show his face, would 
be punished as a traitor. No Turk must have the smallest sus- 
picion of the presence of any flank protection. The Armenian 
slope seemed as dead and empty as ever. It looked as though 
all its defenders had succumbed to the fierce peppering of 
the Turks. After an hour of this savage wasting of munitions, 
the company, four madly daring extended lines of it, attempted 
a fresh assault. The Armenians, now surer than ever of them- 
selves, again allowed them to come up close before they again 
opened fire: a fire far worse, far bloodier, than the last. Now 
the non-commissioned officers found it impossible to keep 
control of a wild retreat. In an instant the whole Saddle was 
swept clear. Only the cursing of wounded came out of the 
bushes. A few Armenians were about to climb out of their 
trenches when Gabriel shouted to them that no one had had 
orders to leave his post. 

After a while some Turkish stretcher-bearers gingerly ad- 
vanced between the trees and began to wave a red-moon flag. 
Gabriel sent Chaush Nurhan a few steps out to them. He 
beckoned them nearer; then he bellowed: “You can take away 
your dead and wounded. Rifles, munitions, packs, cartridge- 
belts, bread-rations, uniforms, and boots to be left here.” 

Upon which, under the threat of barrels turned on them, 
the stretcher-bearers were forced to undress each corpse, and 

P9 



leave all this, in untidy heaps. Then, when they had cleared 
away these victims— it took a long time, because they had 
always to keep coming back — all the fighters, including 
Chaush Nurhan, were o£ opinion that the attack had been 
routed, and that no further attempt need be feared. Gabriel 
did not heed these deceptive voices. He ordered Avakian to 
collect the nimblest lads among the scouts and some of his own 
group of orderlies. These were sent out to collect the plundered 
stores and scramble back behind the line with them. He picked 
out the slipperiest of his spies. They were to follow the com- 
panies and watch their movements very closely. Even before 
the orderlies finished collecting, Haik, a youngster not much 
older than Stephan, was already back with his report. Some 
of the Turks were climbing the mountain, farther north, at a 
place where there was nothing for them to find. 

This could only be an attempt at envelopment from the 
coast side. So much was clear not only to Gabriel, but to 
Chaush Nurhan and aU the rest. Gabriel deputed his command 
to his most reliable decad commander, and left the trench, 
taking Nurhan with him. They clrnibed up to the men posted 
among the rocks and itching to fight. The natives of Musa 
Dagh knew every stone, every jutting ledge, every grotto, 
bush, and aloe of this bare, indented, hmestone promontory, 
below which, three or four hundred feet to the sea, the jagged 
cliff fell sheer, or in ledges. This knowledge was of incal- 
culable advantage against troops who could not find their 
way here, no matter how much the stronger these might be. 
Bagradian left it to his mountaineers to dispose themselves so 
cunningly in the crevices and behind rocks that communica- 
tion was kept intact and there would be no danger of one re- 
ceiving the other’s fire. Their task was the same as that of 
the others — ^to lure the enemy on to destruction by means o£ 
complete invisibility and absolute quiet. 

But this time the enemy was more alert. He advanced his 
main force slowly along the counter-slope, facing the Saddle 

330 



and opened fire at the very edge of the wood, well-protected 
by trees. It was a fire at once vehement and nervous, directed 
against the main .trench, but, as before, not answered by its 
defenders. And, during this, announced by scouts, a patrol 
of four men advanced, very gingerly indeed, among the rocks. 
It was evident that these were not mountain-dwellers. They 
came stumbling on across the stones, ducking their way from 
cover to cover. They reconnoitred very carefully, looked into 
every hole, behind every ledge. The Armenians saw with 
relish that they were saptiehs. The soldiers were strangers. 
But the saptiehsi Now was the moment to pay back in some 
of its own coin this lowest -by-product of militarism, these 
bestial skunks, valiant in their dealings with old women, scared 
of a man, until they had disarmed him three times. Gabriel 
noticed a crazy ghnt in many eyes. 

The onbashi of the saptiehs must have imagined that he 
was already past the line of entrenchments, and so in the rear 
of the Armenians. Noiselessly he sent back one of his men, 
who began to signal with a red flag. It was sull some time 
before this enveloping force came slowly on, at a stumbling, 
ever-retreating pace, as though they were advancing through 
boiling water. This group was half infantrymen, half saptiehs. 
Urged by its officers, it reached the place to which the onbashi 
had already reconnoitred the ground. Then, at a moment when 
most of them were without cover, the Armenians opened 
fire, from all sides. They leapt about in scurrying confusion. 
They forgot their rifles. The Turk, the Anatolian especially, is 
a good soldier. But this attack seemed to come from nowhere. 
Not even the brave knew how to defend themselves. By the 
time the Armenians dashed out from their hiding holes and 
among their rocks, the air was thick with groans and yelps 
of pain. With Chaush Nurhan at their head they at once drove 
in a wedge between saptiehs and infantry. Of the first a num- 
ber were cut off, and driven outwards, towards the clifk. 
They got lost among the inexorable rocks, and cringed help- 

331 



les^y against the stone waiting for a huH^ or remained det* 
perately caught, clinging to the thorny acanthus plants. Many 
began to shp, turned head over heels, and bounced from rock 
to rock, like balls, before they went hurthng into the sea. But 
the main body of the Turks tried to escape from amid this 
rocky confusion by the shortest cut, and leapt, stumbled, 
rushed towards the Saddle, chased by the mountaineers. 

These were no longer sane. Unintclhgible, throaty growls 
came out of them as they tracked this enemy. Gabrid himself 
had long since lost the clear-headedness of a leader, was the 
wild prey of some intoxication, a crazy rhythm come suddenly 
to life in his blood that had slumbered a thousand years. He, 
too, let out these short, slavering sounds, a savage speech 
which, if he had been conscious, would have horrified him. 
Now the world was a hundred times more impalpable. It was 
nothing I Less solid than the humming of a dragonfly. It was 
a reddish, skipping ballet, in which the dancer could feel no 
pain. Pastor Aram Tomasian, who had been one of the fight- 
ers among the rocks, was swept along by the same madness. 
He, like a crusader brandishing a crucifix, howled: “Christ^ 
Christ!” But the warrior-Christ of his battle-cry had very httlc 
indeed in common with that stern, suffering Lord, by whose 
Testament the pastor as a rule strove to guide his days. Oddly, 
these shouts of “Christ” brought Gabriel back to his senses 
with a jerk. He began to observe the fight, but as though he 
himself were not engaged in it, much less its commander. 

This noise of a battle among the rocks was the signal for 
the Turkish firing-line, on the edge of the wood along the 
counter-slope, to advance in a frontal attack. They came out 
in extended hnes, shooung at nothing, threw themselves tin 
the ground, shot in the air again, sprang up again, ran on a 
few steps, and then ducked down. At just this minute the last 
of the routed, would-be envelopers had been driven out from 
among the rocks. Therefore their pursuers’ fire took the at- 
tacking lines in the fl ank . 


332 



Oabrid stood on a todc, but did not shoot He watched one 
et the Turkish lieutenants intercept a disordered group to rally 
a delence around it The line was already flinging its^ down 
to open fire. But Chaush Nurhan sprang at the Turkish offi- 
cer, and felled him with a crack of his rifle-butt The Turks 
threw away their guns, as though they had just seen the 
devil, and indeed the old sergeant was not unhke him. He 
let them see what a perfect soldier the Turkish infantry had 
lost His face was purple. His huge grey moustache bristled 
wildly. He had not even a hoarse crow left in his throat. He 
did not seem in the least to realize that he must take cover or 
be shot down. Sometimes he stopped, to raise his bugle and 
force out of it a long, jerky call, whose ferocity had its effect 
on both friend and enemy. 

When Bagradian saw that the Turks were trying to turn 
their front towards the rocks, he swung his rifle round his 
head, to give the men in the long trench the galloping-signal. 
Their decad commanders had had their work cut out to hold 
them. They came rushing with a bellow over the top, spatter- 
ing the new Turkish flank with bullets, without throwing 
themselves down, or any longer trying to save supphes. So that 
the company was helplessly caught between the two blades of 
a shears. With more presence of mind and experience, Ba- 
gradian might have wiped them out or taken them prisoner. 
As it was, by a wild scurry, they could escape, though both 
flank-protecting dccads blocked their way, and then shot after 
them. This wild Turkish scurry down the mountain did not 
even halt at the foot of the Damlayik, but only in the church 
square of Biuas, where at last they ralhed. 

Nine soldiers, seven saptiehs, and one young officer had 
fallen into the hands of the defenders. These, as a matter of 
course, and with the most frigid ferocity, set to work to demon- 
strate to their prisoners exactly what it feels hke to die in an 
Armenian massacre. Two of the saptiehs Gabriel could no 
longer rescue. But he. Pastor Aram, and a few more of the 

333 



elder men threw themsdves before the other prisoners — 
though Chaush Nurhan, and with him the overwhelming 
majority, could not in the least understand such mercy shown 
to ^e butchering tyrants of si hundred thousand of their race. 
It was very hard for Bagradian to make the disappointed men 
see reason. 

“We shan’t get anything out of kilhng them, nor out of 
keeping them here as hostages. They’ll sacrifice their own 
without thinking twice about it. And then we should have to 
feed them. But it would be to our advantage to send them 
with a message to Antakiya.” 

He turned to the white-faced lieutenant, who could scarcely 
manage to stand upright. “Well, you’ve seen how easily we 
can deal with you. And you can send us regiments instead of 
companies — ^it’s all the same to us. Look up at the sky. The 
sun’s not down yet. And, if we’d really wanted it to happen, 
not one of you would still be alive. Go and say that to your 
commandant in Antakiya. Tell him how much more mildly 
than you deserved we’ve handled you. Tell him, in my name, 
he’d better keep his regiments and companies for war against 
the enemies of Turkey — not against her peaceful citizens. We 
want to be let live up here in peace. That’s all we want. Don’t 
molest us in future, unless you’d hke some even worse ex- 
periences.” 

The swaggering undertones of this, the certainty with which 
he seemed to be threatemng, the pitiful fear these prisoners 
showed of being slaughtered — all this assuaged the blood-lust 
of the decads. They forced the Turks not only to leave behind 
their arms, their boots and uniforms, but to strip to the slcin. 
In this miserable state they were released, and had besides 
to drag their dead and wounded down the mule-track of the 
Damlayik. That day’s booty was considerable: ninety-three 
Mauser lifies, abundant munitions, bayonets. Of the sixty-five 
decads not fully armed, about ten could now be armed com- 
pletely. Tlus did most of all to raise morale. Sudi success had 

334 



been gained without one loss — the Armenians had only six 
wounded, and none of them seriously. 

It is not surprising that so stupendous a victory should have 
been very much overrated, both by the decads and the people. 
A few poor, exiled villagers, insufficiently clad and scarcely 
housed, nesting on the summit of their hill, had — as it were 
with their bare fists — with the certainty of death in their 
souls, routed a company at war-strength, a hundred Turkish 
regulars, trained for months and armed with the very latest 
rifles. And not only routed, but almost finished them. This 
fierce but easy struggle had not lasted four hours. It had all 
been accomplished in a hand’s turn, without a casualty worth 
the name, thanks to a well-considered plan, a magnificent 
system of defences. 

But Gabriel had no joy in it all, only a kind of weary em- 
barrassment. Nor did he feel he had rendered any extraor- 
dinary service. Any other officer who knew war could have put 
the Damlayik in just the same state of defence. It was not 
unusual acumen, it was the natural advantage of the mountain, 
that had given them their victory. The grey heads of the 
mukhtars swayed before his eyes, since even these uncon- 
genial peasants, who had always behaved so pawkily towards 
“the foreigner,” were now clutching at his hand to kiss it as 
though he had been their father. This hand-kissing filled him 
with dismay. His right hand struggled against it desperately. 
He longed to thrust it into his pocket. Slowly he forged a way 
through the dense crowd. He looked round for help, for a face 
that meant something, and at last he discovered Iskuhi. She 
had followed him all this time, but always keeping behind his 
back. Now, as he drew her hand towards him, he seemed to 
feel that her fragile body could give support. 

“Juliette’s waiting; she’s got everything ready,” Iskuhi whis- 
pered. 

He did not heed her words; he heeded her touch. Iskuhi 

335 



walked at his side, as though leading the blind. Suddenljr be 
felt astonished that all this blood and death should not have 
moved her. 

At last, in the tent, he could wash all over, luxuriously, after 
a village barber had shaved him. Juliette waited on him. She 
had heated up the water in kettles, poured it into the rubber 
bath, laid out the towels and the pyjama-suit which she knew 
to be his favourite. She stayed outside the tent until he had 
dried himself. Never, in their long married life, had they 
lost the last vestige of shame before each othen It took him 
a long time to get clean. He scrubbed with a hard brush, till 
his slcm was red. But, the more attention he gave to this, the 
more impatiently he strove to get this day scrubbed well out 
of him, the farther away he seemed to be from himself. Into 
this marvellous cleanness in which he revelled the “abstract 
man” refused to return— the “individual,” the man he had 
brought with him from Paris. He saw the same face in 
Juliette’s looking-glass, flanked by its candles. And yet, deep 
in his soul, there was something wrong. He could not make it 
out. 

Her voice outside softly reminded: “Are you ready, Gabriel? 

. . . We’ll carry the bath-water outside,” she was saying zeal- 
ously, not having called in one of the servants. They bore the 
rubber tub out between them, to empty it behind the tent. 
Gabriel sensed a yielding readmess in Juliette. She had suffered 
no other hand to serve, had come more than half-way to meet 
him, with deep emotion. Perhaps the hour had arrived in 
which the stranger in her would melt away, submit, as he, over 
there in Paris, had submitted his to her alien self. 

“How much longer?” he thought. For now, after today’s 
fighting, he had no more hope that they would survive. He 
laced up the entrance to the tent. Gendy he drew Juhette to 
the bed. 

They lay very close, but could say nothing. She displayed 
a new, and reverent tenderness. Her eyes made no effort to 

336 



keep 1»ck teats as, tremulottsly, she kqit repeating: “I’ve been 
so terrified :dx>ut you." 

He stared as absently at her as though her grief were incom- 
prehensible. Strive as he might, his thoughts were savagely 
swept away by fierce powers to his trenches. “If only the sen- 
tries weren’t slack tonight, didn’t go to sleep, weren’t late in 
reheving each other. . . . Who could tell that the Turks 
might not be planning a night-attack.” Gabriel had ceased to 
belong to Juliette — and to himself. For the first time in their 
married life he could not manage to show he loved her. 


33 ? 



2 


The Exploits of the Boys 

This devastating rout of a front-line infantry company on 
Musa Dagh came as a painful surprise to the Hukumet in 
Antioch. It was a lasting stain on the Turkish escutcheon. The 
power of any warrior race is dependent on magic belief in in- 
vinability, and the morale engendered by it. So that, for those 
who take the sword, every value totters with a defeat, and 
their very foundations seem to crumble when a race of puny 
intellectuals succeeds in routing professional soldiers in success- 
ful, so to speak, amateur competition. This had undeniably 
been the case in the sortie of August 4. 

And what — Allah is great! — ^was to be written and read 
about Musa Dagh! Politically it was far less significant than the 
news of It was hkely to prove dangerous. It would need only a 
few more Bagradians here and there to get Turkey into serious 
difficulties. Since every Armenian was in actual fact condemned 
to death, since some still had weapons at their disposal, such 
complications would have to be reckoned with. 

The worthy atizens of Antioch, from whom this humilia- 
tion was being provisionally withheld, saw lights at a very late 
hour in the windows of their Kaimakam’s council-chamber 
and feared the worst. That distnet councillor presided over 
the major provincial assembly, usually composed of fourteen 
members. At the moment his bloated body seemed to long, 
with every breath it drew, to shove away the conference table. 
The Kaimakam’s hverish face, with its dark-brown pouches 
under the eyes, looked sallower than ever in the discreet il* 

338 



liuninatioa of an oil-lamp. Councillors became more and more 
verbose. He, however, sat silent and full of cares. His loose, 
well-shaven cheeks sagged over the wide stick-up collar; the 
fez had been pushed askew on his left temple, a sign of evil- 
tempered drowsiness. On his right the commandant of An- 
tioch, a grey-bearded colonel, with small eyes and rosy, inno- 
cent cheeks, a bimbashi of the good old school, who would, it 
was obvious, stand out to the last drop of heroic blood in 
defence of his own peace and quiet. His deputy sat beside him, 
a younger yus-bashi, a major of barely forty-two, his antithesis, 
as so frequently happens in military double harness. This 
major was wiry, hatchet-faced, with very determined features; 
his deep-set eyes glinted with suppressed ire. They seemed to 
proclaim to all and sundry: “It’s my misfortune to be yoked 
to this unconscionable old dug-out. You all of you know 
me, you know I’m keen enough for anything, and always do 
whatever I set out to do. I belong to the Ittihad genera- 
tion!” 

A lieutenant of the routed company, the sole commissioned 
survivor of August 4, he who had been sent naked to Antakiya 
with Gabriel Bagradian’s message, stood giving his report to 
these superiors. He could scarcely be blamed for doing his 
best to make disaster seem more palatable by the wildest exag- 
gerations of Armenian strength. There must be quite ten — 
or even twenty— thousand of them on Musa Dagh, hidden 
within the strongest defences. And there could be no doubt 
that for years they had been collecting munitions and supplies, 
enough to hold out, up there, indefinitely. He, the midasim, 
with his own eyes had seen two machme-gun emplacements. 
It was machine-guns which, apart from their ten-fi>ld out- 
numbermg, had decided the unfortunate event. 

The Kaimakam said nothing. He rested his heavy head on 
his right hand and stared down at the map of the Ottoman 
empire spread over the table. Though such high matters con- 
cerned none of them, the Hukiimet officials found it delight- 

339 



fill to stick in little flag-pins along the fronts. But, for ati 
their loyal manipulations, the future of the war seemed not of 
the rosiest. The httle pins kept pricking further and further 
back, into Turkish flesL These fronts perhaps scarcely justified 
Enver Pasha’s glittering reputation. His Caucasus army, his 
best material, strewed, as a field of unburied skeletons, the 
passes and slopes of those pitiless highlands. And already the 
Russians stood on the boundaries of Persia, their faces set to- 
wards Mosul, driving Djevded Pasha, Enver’s cousin and a 
general renowned for his massacres, further and further into 
retreat. The English, with their Gurkhas and Hindus, threat- 
ened Mesopotamia. Jemal’s grandiose Suez expedition had 
literally melted away m sand. Men and stores lay covered by 
the desert. All this time, on the Galhpoli peninsula, the Allies 
with their big naval guns had been battering on the gates of 
Istanbul. Huge stores of arms and war material had already 
been wasted on all these occasions. And Turkey had no, or 
next to no, war industry. She depended on the bounty of 
Krupp in Essen, Skoda m Pilsen. These production centres 
of destruction could scarcely keep pace with the huge demands 
of immediate clients. Only a small percentage of that huge 
output of new cannon, howitzers, mortars, machine-guns, 
hand- and gas-grenades came through to Turkey, and had to 
be hurried straight to the various fronts. 

The old, good-tempered bimbashi with the rosy cheeks put 
on his glasses, although there was nothing for him to read. 
He may simply have wanted to point out that he was the 
most far-sighted man in the room. He nodded severely at the 
mulasim. “This misfortune is the direct result of your stupid- 
ity and carelessness. It’s down in regulations that you’ve got 
to reconnoitre any enemy position before advancing on it. 
But, row that it’s got so far, I ask the Kaimakam: What’s to 
be done about it.? Must we sacrifice even more of our men? 
Or shall we leave these cursed swine in peace, to starve on 
their mountain? What harm do they do us? This deportation 

340 



is yout busiaess, not ours. Why don't you civilians get on with 
it? If they really have got ten thousand rifles . . . 

The red-haired tnudir raised his hand to speak. “They 
haven’t five hundred, not even three— I ought to know, since 
I’m in charge of that nahiyeh, and went to the villages.’’ 

The bimbashi took oH his glasses, as purposelessly as he had 
put them on. “I think it would be best to suppress the inci- 
dent. They’ve deported themselves. What more do we want? 
You’ve got all sorts of people along the coast, Greeks and 
Arabs. . . . Am I to be asked to make myself ridiculous by 
waging a litdc war under their noses? If I sweep up every 
detached unit in the kazah, I shan’t get together four regular 
companies. And the Chettehs, the Kurds, and whatever other 
scum I could lay hands on wouldn’t only go for the Arme- 
nians — they’d go for us I Believe me, it’s far wiser to say no 
more about it.” 

The morose yus-bashi witLthe deep-set eyes had for an hour 
lit one cigarette from the last He had not said a word. Now 
he stood up, and respectfully fronted his superior. “Bimbashi 
Eifcndi, will you allow me please to express my most respect- 
ful surprise at what you’ve just said? How can we possibly 
hush this matter up when a company commander, three offi- 
cers, and a hundred men have all been slaughtered? Even now 
I suggest it’s unforgivably slack of us to have delayed so long 
with our report. The instant this conference is over, I shall 
have to draw it up, at your orders, to be sent on to GJf.Q.” 

The bimbashi collapsed. His cheeks turned rosier still; first 
because the major was right— he always was — and second be- 
cause he was a Satan. 

Now at last the Kaimakam seemed to rouse himself from 
his long, impersonal meditations: “I shall liquidate this afiair 
within my own province.” 

This was his astute bureaucratic way of proclaiming a highly 
involved decision, to which fear of the Wali of Aleppo mainly 
contributed. Sharp daily instructions kept demanding that the 

341 



deportation order should be enforced with an almost apoplec* 
tic zeal. The resistance of these seven villages might break 
the Kaimakam, since it implied slack surveillance and incom- 
plete disarmament. Should the Wah receive a plain unvar- 
nished tale of the affair, the Kaimakam might look for the 
worst from him and from Ittihad. His avil report would have 
to be most delicately phrased. 

The old bimbashi remarked obtusely: “How can you liqui- 
date It, when your saptiehs are all on convoy duty, and your 
soldiers all at the front?” He blinked, and glowered at the 
major. “As for you, Yus-Bashi, I order you, in your report 
to G.H.Q. to ask for four battalions and field artillery. We 
can’t surround a huge great mountain of that sort without 
troops, and without guns.” 

The yus-bashi did not seem to notice the old man’s rage. 
“Bimbashi Effendi, I quite understand your order. His Excel- 
lency General Jemal Pasha has all such matters personally 
explained to him. I think you may be certain he’ll back you 
up. These Armenian deportations arc, after all, the work of 
his friends. He certainly won’t let a few lousy Christian peas- 
ants play about with you.” 

The Kaimakam, who meanwhile seemed to have fallen 
asleep again, had already decided his course of action. He 
must ally himself with the strongest man in the room, the 
major, and, to that end, throw the old bimbashi to the wolves. 
So the Kaimakam nearly yawned his head off, and rapped 
the table with the ivory handle of his cane: “I dismiss this 
session, and would request a few minutes’ private conversa- 
tion with the yus-bashi, to decide on our joint report to the 
civil and mihtary authorities. Bimbashi Effendi, I’ll submit 
mmc to you for endorsement.” 

Next day two long and involved accounts left Antioch, The 
very severe acknowledgments took five more days in which 
to arrive. Musa Dagh, so these orders ran, must be taken with 
what material was to hand, and instantly cleared, whatever 

342 



happened. The only concession to the himbashi was the loan 
of a couple of lo cm. howitzers, already on their way to 
Aleppo from Hama, and now to be diverted to Antakiya. It 
was seven days before this artillery arrived. A very callow 
young lieutenant, three corporals, twelve old reservist artillery- 
men, and a few filthy privates for dragging purposes, com- 
posed the crew. It would be almost impossible to use howitzers 
of this pattern in the mountains. 

In a sense Stephan had a more difficult time of it than his 
father, whose earliest memories linked him to Musa Dagh. 
Yet Stephan, in this short time, seemed to have forgotten his 
previous life, his fourteen years of Europe. He had sunk, if one 
is to call it sinking, back into his race. But not so Gabriel. 
Gabriel’s very marriage had placed him between two blood- 
streams. At first he had even felt it rather tacdess that he, 
a foreigner, should force a plan to save them upon these na- 
tives. Perhaps that was the deepest reason for those solemn, 
yet disconsolate emotions which invaded him on the night of 
August 4. 

Stephan was different. Though two blood-streams ran in 
his veins, his mother’s seemed to have lost all influence. He 
had become what all the others he mixed with were — an 
oriental schoolboy. Why? He could not have asserted himself 
among them otherwise. These pompously conceited, apishly 
phant schoolboys were not in the least impressed by the well- 
brought-up young Stephan’s western attainments. The most 
fluent written and spoken French was no use here. When he 
told them of European cities, they only ragged him. Howls of 
derision greeted his habit of carrymg school books under his 
arm instead of on his head as they did. What other way could 
you possibly carry books? Had Stephan been soft, he would 
at once have gone running to his father and begged to be 
taken away from school. As it was, he took up the challenge. 
He had had to quarrel for several days with his mother to get 

343 



permission to wear Armenian dress. In his new clothes Ste> 
phan, who was a handsome boy, looked like the young prince 
on a Persian miniature. This Juliette could fed, but she felt 
more strongly that this prince had nothing to do with Ste> 
phan, her boy. So they struck a bargain. Stephan might go to 
school in “fancy dress,” but must wear ordmary clothes at 
home. Since after the flight to the Damlayik there was no 
longer any “home” to be normal in, the contract fell through. 

Yes, Stephan was completely changed. But no one knew 
what efforts it had cost him to go back, in this fashion, to 
the primitive. He could wear the same clothes as the others. 
But at first they were disastrously clean, and without one rent 
in them. This cleanness was a serious drawback — ^and he ad- 
mitted that he had only himself to thank. He still found it 
hard not to dislike himself for having dirty hands and feet, 
thick black nails, and uncombed hair. When one day, still in 
Yoghonoluk, he had managed to get lice in his head, so that 
Maman, with squeamish hands, tied a napkin soaked in petrol 
round his hair, he had felt thoroughly miserable. Stephan had 
permanent disadvantages, as compared to the other village 
boys. His feet, for instance, no matter how much trouble he 
might take with them, dabble them as he would in shme and 
dust — to how many dangerous climbs had he not exposed 
them.? — ^remained white and pampered. He could achieve no 
more than tan, blisters, kibes, which, besides being very pain- 
ful, gave Maman her pretext for keeping him in the house. 
How he envied the other boys their impervious feet; brown, 
shrunken claws, vastly superior to his. Stephan had really 
to suffer before he could establish his position. The village 
boys let him feel he was not their equal, that not all the 
splendours of Villa Bagradian, including Avakian and the 
household staff, impressed them enough to make him accept- 
able. What assets had Stephan to strengthen him in this curious 
struggle? Ambition, energy, which he usually turned against 
his own body, and one other quality which these village boys 

344 



did not posses. Even Haik, already past fourteen, muscular, 
tall, and well set up, the undisputed head of the gang, could 
not boast the purposeful concentration, the planned logical 
thought, which Stephan had brought with him from Europe. 
As a rule these Orientals forgot a scheme before they had 
half carried it through; they were swirled about by their short- 
lived notions, instinctive urges, like leaves in the wind. Any- 
one watching them after school might have fancied them a 
pack of excited young animals, rushing here and there to no 
end, impelled by one vague impulse after another. When, 
like a swarm of birds, they ahghted on some wide, unguarded 
orchard, this might be considered a purposeful enterprise — 
but far more often they would all go darting off into mountain 
thickets, urged on by demons, or cluster about a stagnant 
pond, or rush through the fields, to twirl and wallow in their 
sensations. Such excursions often ended in a religious, or better, 
a kind of pagan ritual, but of this they themselves were, of 
course, unaware. It began by their forming a ring, clasping 
each other, humming faintly, till their heads began to loll, till 
their voices, their swaying rythm, rose and rose, till at last they 
all burst forth in a howling tumult, beyond descripuon. On 
many this rite was of such potency that their eyes turned up, 
and foam stood out on their lips. They, in their simplicity, 
only practised the ancient, well-known attempt of certain 
dervishes to get into secret touch with rhe primal force of the 
universe, by means of such epileptic self-conquest. They had 
seen no grown-up do anything like it, but their need for such 
exultant self-conquest was in the very air of this countryside. 
Naturally Stephan, the European, was the puzzled, hopeless 
spectator of these ecstasies. He, of necessity, lacked one strength 
— ^the very faculty most predominant in the lives of all these 
other boys — a kind of clear-sighted rapport with nature, im- 
possible to put into words. Just as a good swimmer can lie, 
sit, stand, walk, or dance, entirely “m his element,” in the 
waves, with a physical ease that is indescribable, so were these 

345 



children of Musa Dagh indescribably “in their element,” in the 
country that lay around it. They were interwoven with the 
very nature in which they lived. Their hills ware as much a 
part of them as thar flesh, so that to differentiate between out- 
ward and inward became impossible.* Every leaf that stirred, 
every fruit that dropped, the rustling of a lizard, the faint 
plash of a far-off waterfall — these myriad stirrings had ceased 
to be mirrored by their senses; they formed the very heart of 
those senses themselves, as though each child were himself a 
little Musa Dagh, creating it all with his own body. These 
bodies were like carncr-pigeons, whose inhuman sense of di- 
rection can never err. They were like slender, pliant dowsing- 
rods; their twitchings proclaimed the hidden treasures of the 
earth. Young Stephan, who for far too long had had his 
feet upon dead pavements, had, it is true, an adroit and active, 
but a numbed, body by comparison. 

But when the villages set up their camp on the Damlayik, 
when these aimless rovings came to an end, and disciplme and 
purposeful activity were required of schoolboys, Stephan’s 
prestige increased by leaps and bounds. The reflected glory of 
bis father’s leadership contributed. This cohort of half-grown 
boys ranged from ten to fifteen years of age. Of the few girls 
none were older than eleven, since girls of twelve in eastern 
villages are already considered to be ripe. And Ter Haigasun 
had given orders that even the elder among the boys must 
go to school in their hours off duty. They seldom managed 
it, since either their masters were in the trenches, or shirked 
classes, which they considered entirely unnecssary. Hapeth 
Shatakhian led the scouts’ group, Avakian set the orderlies 
their tasks, but, apart from these, the three hundred or more 
boys of the “cavalry” were left to their own devices most of 
the day. They strayed about the Damlayik plateau, making 
every knoll, crevice, gully insecure. They would even dare to 
play in the trenches and embitter the lives of the decads, drill- 
ing under Nurhan’s scourge, by inquisitive and sardonic hang- 

346 



ing about. These aimless wanderings were forbidden. Then 
they grew impudent, and began to break the bounds of the 
camp, strayed oif on to the heights beyond the Saddle, which 
faced the valley, or into the rocks and stream-beds of the 
coast side. It was stricdy forbidden on the Damlayik to go 
outside the Town Enclosure. But the gang managed never 
to be caught. Stephan and Haik, of course, were involved. 
Sato, too, had slipped in among them, and now she was not to 
be got rid of. Although the Bagradian family had given shelter 
to this strange bastard, the villagers still objected to having 
her in contact with their children. So that Sato depended en- 
tirely on the good, or bad, temper of the gang. One day they 
thrashed her, the next they let her come along. She lived on 
the verge, here as everywhere. She scurried over sticks and 
stones with them, never close behind the rest, but always a 
good way to the side. When the gang squatted together in the 
ilex gully, or in any other place out of bounds, bragging, think- 
ing vaguely of new schemes, or only, as its habit was, intensi- 
fying the quahty of existence by wild, collective swayings of 
the body, Sato’s thirsty eyes would stare across from out of 
her sohtude. Then the eternal, gabbling pariah mingled her 
voice with that of the choir and, still aoart, gave imitations 
of their wild swayings. 

There was another doubtful member besides Sato. His name 
was Hagop, and Stephan protected him. Hagop’s right foot 
had been amputated a few years previously by the army doctor 
m Aleppo. Now this boy hopped on a rough crutch; it was 
only a stick with a wooden cross-piece. But, in spite of this 
rickety support, Hagop could move with a ceruin vehement 
eagerness, the wild nimbleness of gait often to be seen in 
cripples. He was refusing to let these two-legged boys get 
the better of him, and when he followed their stormy chase 
there was not a hand’s breadth between him and the last 
of them. Hagop’s parents were well-to-do, and he was related 
to Tomasian. He had thoughtful eyes and, what was very 

347 



rare among the villagers, dark yellow hair. He read avidfy 
whatever he could lay hands on, stories in almanacs and so 
forth. But he did not want to be a scholar. He wanted to run, 
play, climb, and swagger and, since this was war-time, do the 
same scout duty as all the rest. Stephan, already attracted by 
his light hair, protected him, and not merely out of pity. But 
Haik toughly opposed all Hagop’s ambitions. Without the 
slightest sentimental compunction he made him feel that 
cripples are not worth considering. 

Haik was a case apart. At fourteen and a half he was already 
fully representative of that dour being, the Armenian moun- 
taineer. His deliberate slouch, muscular slimness, the huge 
hands which swung so heavily at his sides, expressed all the 
overweening pride of this firmly self-sufficient race — a physique 
which set him well apart from the othgr members of the gang, 
with their rippling, eastern restlessness of body. The Arme- 
nian living in the cities of his diaspora may have all the phancy 
of Ulysses — it is not for nothing that the Odyssey makes 
cunnmg and homelessness go together in its protagonist— -the 
Armenian mountaineer, the pick and core of the whole race, 
is arrogant and impatient. These very exasperating traits he 
opposes, together with unremimng industry, to the lazy dig- 
nity of the Turk. Such a clash of fundamentals explains a good 
deal. 

Haik’s family came from the north, from the Dokhus- 
Bunar mountains. His mother, the widow Shushik, a blue-eyed 
giantess, was by no means popular in her village, indeed peo- 
ple shunned her almost in terror. Though she had hved for 
years under Musa Dagh, she still counted as a stranger. The 
story went that once Widow Shushik had throttled with her 
bare hands an impudent assailant of her virtue. Whether this 
was true or false, her boy Haik had in any case inherited both 
her muscular body and flinty, arrogant disposition. Arrogant 
people always diminish others’ self-esteem. Haik did this con- 
stantly to Stephan. It was because of him that the young Ba- 

348 



gradian forced himself to one exploit after another, to m^e 
quite certain he was genuine. This urge to convince the dour, 
sceptical Haik took, as it always does in ardent natures at 
such an age, the most poignantly self-lacerating forms. Samuel 
Avakian, as his tutor, kept an eye constantly on Stephan, 
anxious lest he should get into dangerous mischief. This fussy 
carefulness of his elders shamed young Stephan in his own 
eyes, and in Haik's degraded him to the levd of a pampered, 
sheltered mother’s darling. Haik refused to be convinced, in 
spite of Stephan’s constant, strenuous efforts, that Bagradian’s 
son could really be “all right.” The worst of it all Vas that 
any preference shown to Stephan made Hade a little more 
cocksure, since Widow Shushik’s son had a searching eye, not 
to be taken in by mere externals. When Stephan, as often 
happened about that time, lay tossing from side to side in his 
tent, kept awake by his own doubts and questionings, his rest- 
less mind burned with the one question: “Oh, God, what can 
I do to show Haik something!” But this fight for Haik’s 
esteem was only one front in a war waged for its own renown 
by the ambitious soul of the young Bagradian. 

At about this time — ^it was now the ninth day on Musa Dagh 
— ^the camp began, at first without really knowing it, to suffer 
from its unmixed diet of meat, the almost total lack of fruit 
and vegetables. A drastic order had already restricted the milk 
ration so that only invalids, hospital patients, and children 
under ten now drew their share of the thin goat’s milk still 
available, leaving over a very small quantity for cheese and 
butter-making. Everyone growled at having to pool supplies, 
and m fact, by some incomprehensible law, that summary 
measure seemed to have worsened the general stock and di- 
minidied rather than evenly distributed it. Though Juliette, 
now that she worked with Dr. Altouni, had placed at the dis- 
posal of his hospital more than a fair share of her supplies, her 
tinned food, her sugar, her tea and ric^ she still had enough 

349 



cake and biscuits to enable her, and those who lived with her, 
to supplement this diminishing bread ration. Stephan had not 
yet suffered the least privation. Haik, on the other hand, was 
already beginning to growl at the eternal, stringy mutton he 
had to gulp down. It was not even hung, it was half raw. 
There was nothing to go with it. “Oh, if we’d only got a few 
ffgs or apricots.” Stephan had a vision of the wide orchards 
around the foot of Musa Dagh. But he still said nothing. 

The cohort was continually on duty. A group of orderlies 
had always to be within call of the thirteen teachers; others 
around the numerous observation posts. Teacher Shatakhian 
inspected his scouts every day, and gave unexpected practice- 
alarms. So that a major, unoffiaal enterprise could only be car- 
ried out in the sheltering dark, when the boys were off duty 
and not being supervised. In the course of this same day on 
Musa Dagh, Stephan was already explaining his scheme to 
the cver-unapproachable Haik. How miraculous that a for- 
eigner should have thought of it, not a real Armeman* Since 
the villages moved up on to Musa Dagh one or two daring 
people had already ventured down into the valley, in the hope 
of completing supplies. Always they had come back empty- 
handed, since strong patrols of saptiehs paraded the villages, 
day and night. Stephan’s plan was that the cohorts should 
replenish the diminishing common stock by a night raid into 
the orchards. Haik eyed his ambitious rival thoughtfully, as 
a finished artist might an amateur, who has no idea of the real 
difficulties. Then he at once began to organize this secret rally 
and pick out raiders. Stephan was naturally afraid lest his 
father should get to hear of the scheme and curtail his hberty. 
He admitted his fears. But Haik, who seemed to have for- 
gotten that the whole suggestion had come from Stephan, 
answered in the insufferable voice which he knew so per- 
fectly how to use; 

“You’d better stay up here if you’re scared. I think that’s the 
best thing you could do.” 


350 



These words pierced Stephan to the quick and made him 
resolve not to give his parents’ anxiety another thought. About 
ninety boys stole sacks, barrows, baskets, all they could find. 
At ten m the evening, when the campfires were all extin> 
guished, they crept in twos and threes past the sentries and 
over the barrier. In long lines they raced down the mountain 
and had reached the oudying ordiards within three quarters 
of an hour. Till one in the morning, by the soft light of a sickle 
moon, they picked like mad — ^apricots, oranges, figs. Here was 
a chance for Stephan to show his strength, though he had 
never done such work before. Haik the leader had managed 
to untether three donkeys and bring them along. They were 
loaded up at furious speed. And each of the boys had a heavy 
burden. But they managed to be back in camp by close on 
sunrise. 

These vagrants, who had risked their lives for a trifle, with- 
out really knowing the danger, were received with scoldings, 
even blows, and yet with pride. Stephan darted away from 
the rest before they got to the Town Enclosure, and slipped 
into the shakh’s tent, which he shared with Gonzaguc Maris. 
Gabriel and Juliette never heard of this escapade. Its results 
were scarcely worth mentioning in a population of five thou- 
sand. All the same it gave Pastor Aram Tomasian the notion 
of going down, three evenings later, with a hundred reservists, 
guarded by decads, to make a similar attempt. Unluckily the., 
yield was small. Mohammedan peasants m the neighbourhood 
had meanwhile raided all the orchards, stripping away the 
good fruit harvest, and leaving only unripe and rotting wind- 
falls. 

Gabriel had made the most of the grace allowed him hy the 
Turks. By now his defence-works could really be described as 
completed. The men of the decads, the workers of the reserve, 
had had to sweat as hard during this week as even before 
August 4. By now these trenches had all been lengthened and 

35 * 



deepened down, and the foreground areas stroigtheaed wlh 
encumbrances. Connecting trenches linked up with the sec- 
ond line, as well as with the advanced sniping-points, which 
were well camouflaged with branches, to enable the hardiest 
defenders to snipe an attack in the rear, or shoot down strag- 
glers. Gabriel was for ever racking his brains to invent new 
methods of defence, snares, entanglements, and feints. He 
wanted to make the issue of an attack depend less and less 
on the human factor. His casual training in the ofBcers’ school 
at Istanbul, his experience in the artillery battles at Bulair, 
helped him less than an old infantry manual, issued by the 
French War Office, bought, in sheer, idle curiosity, at a second- 
hand stall along the Pans quays. The sight of this book, now 
so unexpectedly a treasure, produced a strange philosophical 
sensation in Gabriel. It was too vague to be called a thought. 

“I bought this book without ever knowing I should use it, 
simply because I liked the look of the title-page, or because 
the unknown subject vaguely attracted me, though in those 
days military science didn’t attract me in the least. And yet, 
at the instant in which I bought it, quite independently of my 
will, my fate was predetermimng itself. Really one would 
almost think that my kismet is mapped out from A to Z. 
Since in 1910 it made me stop at that second-hand stall on the 
Quai Voltaire simply because it needed this book for its future 
purposes.” 

This was the first meditation to which Gabriel had suc- 
cumbed for many weeks. He shook it off as an encumbrance. 
Even in Yoghonoluk, at the time when he was preparing his 
defence, he had noticed how his sense of reality dimmed, the 
instant he let himself give way to his natural, meditative bent. 
He came to the instant conclusion that the true man of action 
(which he was not) must, of necessity, be mindless. As to this 
technical handbook, it furnished him with numerous warn- 
ings, hints, diagrams, calculations, which he could use on a 
small scale in any circumstances. Chaush Nurhan (they had 



oai&ed him ^TUeoa,” the Lion, as a reward for his feats on 
August 4) drilled the decads to exhaustion-point all day. 
Gabriel set innumerable tactical exercises, so that every man 
might know the ground by inches, and be fully armed against 
all possible methods of assault. The alarm signals, too, had 
been perfected to the uttermost. In just an hour, notwithstand- 
ing the considerable distances, each point could now be occu- 
pied and surrounded, and the movements of troops, on their 
largest scale, be carried through. 

The camp itself was not merely divided into communes, its 
huts were arranged in lines of “streets,” all leading towards 
the big Altar Square. This Town Enclosure was built over 
rocky, uneven ground, but these settlement streets were so 
disposed that the ups and downs had been fairly mitigated. 
The Altar Square, the central point of this primitive but 
crowded encampment, made an almost magnificent impres- 
sion. When the mukhtar, Thomas Kebussyan, succeeded in 
getung his special wooden “town hall,” his six colleagues, no 
less in dignity, would not be pacified till they too had obtained 
the right to have similar huts around the altar. But Father 
Tomasian’s masterpiece was, and remained, the big govern- 
ment building, which had not only real doors and windows 
but a shingle roof, supplied from his stock. That solid struaure 
stood as a kind of symbol for the bold hopes inspiring these 
defenders. It had three rooms; a big centre room, the session- 
room, and two little cabins at the sides. The right side-room 
was separated off from the session-room by a thick wall. This 
large-sized kennel was intended as the communal jail, in case 
there should be serious crime to deal with. Ter Haigasun was 
convinced it would never be used. The left-hand kennel had 
been assigned to Krikor, who meanwhile, between himself and 
pohtics, had erected a solid wail of books, behind which, stood 
his bed. He passed in and out through a narrow gap in it. 
His decorative jars, retorts, and vases had been set up on 

353 



shelves against the wall, while, to his deep personal satisfaction, 
petroleum tins, bales of tobacco, and ironmongery had all 
been impounded by the commune. So that the government 
barrack had not only the character of a Ministry and parlia- 
ment house, but also of a court of justice and even a uni- 
versity and state library. For here Krikor received his disciples, 
the teachers. 

This tiny sample of humanity, the five thousand souls en- 
camped on Musa Dagh, had therefore caught up again, in 
one bound, with civilization. A small store of petrol, a few 
candles, only the most essential tools — such was their entire 
cultural heritage. The first hailstorm had almost ruined their 
wretched provision of mats, covers, bedding, the only re- 
maining comforts they possessed. And yet, not the lowest 
human necessity had sufficed to extinguish in their souls those 
higher needs, for reli^on and order, for reason and intellectual 
growth. Ter Haigasun said mass as usual on Sundays and 
feast-days. School was taught on the school slope. The seventy- 
year-old Bedros Altouni, and Mairik Antaram, had succeeded 
m setting up a model hospital, and bickered with all the other 
leaders for the best food to give their patients. Compared to 
what was usual in the valley, the general standards had even 
risen. These worn, pale faces even expressed a certain peace. 

The long August days were not long enough to get through 
all the work that had to be done. It began at four in the 
morning, when the milkmaids gathered in the square, where 
the shepherds had already herded the ewes and she-goats of 
the Hock. Then the milk was carried m big tubs down to the 
northern side of the Town Enclosure, where already Mairik 
Antaram awaited it, to dole it out to the mukhtars, the hospital, 
the cheese-makers. At the same time a long hne of women and 
girls were on their way to the nearby streams to fill their tall 
clay pitchers with fresh spring water, \/hich remained cold 
as ice in these receptacles, even in the grilling midday sun. 
The many springs of clear icy water on Musa Dagh were one 

354 



of its greatest natural benefits. The seven mukhtars, as the 
lines of water-bearers returned, were already on thdr way to 
the pasturage, to pick out the beasts for the next day’s killing 
from among the flocks. As to the supply it was now evident 
that the position would soon have b^me threatening. A fat 
sheep in these parts, in spite of its almost double weight when 
alive, gave less than thirty-six pounds of eatable meat. But 
ance five thousand people, many of whom had the hardest 
manual labour to perform, had to live almost exclusively on 
this meat, it was necessary to kill about sixty-five sheep a day, 
if the decads and the reserve were to be fed properly. How 
long would life be possible on the mountain if the stock 
diminished at this appalling rate? Everyone could do the sum 
for himself. Ter Haigasun and Pastor Aram Tomasian, on 
the very first Sunday, gave stringent orders that no part of 
the sheep, not even the entrails, was to be wasted. At the same 
time the daily number of victims was reduced to twenty-five 
sheep and twelve goats. And none of this did anything to 
mitigate the many dangers besetting the herds. Much pasturage 
had been used up in the Town Enclosure and the camp- 
buildings surrounding it, not least by the various entrench- 
ments. In the very first days on Musa Dagh these flocks were 
already beginning to lose weight, yet no one dared to send 
out the herdsmen into the meadows, beyond the North Saddle. 
The stockyard was near a little wood, a good distance away^ 
from the Town Enclosure. This d.d not prevent terrified 
bleatings from sounding every morning through the camp. 
At first the slaughtermen suspended their discmbowcU^ 
wethers on the trees, to hang for two days. But this was the 
hottest time of year, and the meat was very quickly spoiled. 
Therefore, after the first unpleasant experience, they buried it, 
since it kept in the earth, and was better Masoned. As, in the 
earliest morning, one deuchment of slaughtermen finished its 
work, to march straight back into the decads, the next b^;an 
to get busy. On long tables, fashioned of tree-trunks dung to* 

355 



gether, the meat was dumped into equal parts. Frexn thcie 
(he women on duty as cooks carried it away to the campfires. 
'Ihere, on ten bricked open hearths^ the huge logs and brush- 
wood crackled already. Gargantuan pots were swinging on 
tall tripods above the flames. But the meat was roasted on 
long spits, or poles, at the open fire. Food was distributed once 
a day, by each mukhtar, to his commune imder the super- 
vision of Pastor Aram. The portions assigned to the separate 
villages were again set out on the long log-tables, where each 
family’s share was divided up. So that a hundred and twelve 
housewives came marching, single file, to their village table, 
and each, from the hands of her mukhtar, received her exactly 
proportioned share. An offiaal person, usually the village 
priest or teacher, checked the number of recipients from his 
list, and ticked off each meal as it was distributed. Naturally 
all this took time, and seldom happened without recrimina- 
tions. Nature had, alas, not designed her sheep, or indeed her 
goats, with sufficient accuracy. The claims of absolute justice 
were never satisfied. The more morose among the vromen 
saw in the injustice of fate the evil machinations of hostile 
men, meanly directed against themselves. It needed all Aram 
Tomasian’s tact to appease and convince these chiding matrons 
that, though Madame Yeranik or Madame Kohar had been 
scurvily treated by fate today, yesterday she had been fortune’s 
favourite. Usually Madame Yeranik and Madame Kohar were 
quite incapable of such logic. 

Before this distribution to civilians, the army had already 
received the best, carried down into its trenches by the young 
orderlies. But the whole camp had to be satisfied with a meal 
a day, since in the evenings only water boiled in the big 
cauldrons on the square. Some kind of roois had been throvm 
into It and the net result christened “tea,” for the sake of 
caUing it something. 

Pastor Aram had also organized a police force. Twelve 
armed men kept order in the Town Enclosure. They went on 

336 



thcff rounds day and night with the threatening tread of a 
constabulary. As they walk^ down the lines of huts, they*' 
made the inhabitants feel that this was war-time and everyone 
must be on his best behaviour. They were responsible for the 
samtary measures on which Bagradian, Bedros Altouni, 
Shatakhian, and other “European fanatics” had insisted as a 
major problem. Much that had been usual m the villages was 
forbidden on Musa Dagh. No leavings to be thrown outside 
the tents, no dirty water emptied into the “street”; above all 
the dictates of nature to be obeyed only in the places designed 
for obedience to them. One of Bagradian’s first measures had 
been the digging out of big latrines. Anyone caught infring- 
ing this law of hygiene was punished with a day’s fast; his 
daily ration was not served out to him. 

That, in its broadest outline^ is the life this people led on 
Musa Dagh for the first fortnight of its encampment. The 
germs of everything which makes up the general life of 
humanity were already there. This people dwelt in a wilder- 
ness, exposed to every peril of the void. Death so inescapably 
surrounded them that only the most sentimental optimist 
could still hope to avoid it altogether. The commune’s short 
history worked itself out according to the law of least re- 
sistance. This law had imposed communal forms, to wliich it 
submitted with as good or ill a grace as it could muster, though* 
all would far rather have felt free to fend for themselves, just 
as they chose. But the rich especially, the owners of expropri- 
ated herds, deeply resented this nationalization of private 
property. Their clear perception that, in a convoy, they would 
by now most probably have lost not only their property, but 
their lives, did not in the least assuage the bitterness of having 
been “pauperized.” Even now, when what was left to them of 
life seemed likely to be a matter of days, they did all they 
could to distinguish themselves from plebeians by at least 
“keeping up appearances.” 


357 



In the centre of the camp rose the altar. When, at about the 
hour of the last night-watch, one hour before the greying of 
the skie^ the Milky Way, grown fainter, moved on above it, 
as though it were the centre and heart of all things. Ter 
Haigasun, the priest, would sometimes kned on the highest 
step, leaning his head on his open missal. Ter Haigasun knew 
the world and was a sceptic. For that very reason he strove 
so passionately to draw into himself the strength of prayer. 
When everyone else had ceased to believe in any rescue, he, 
the last of them all, would have to be permeated with the sure 
sense of impending miracle. Certainty that they were not to 
be lost, the faith that can move mountains, raise from the 
dead! Ter Haigasun’s soul struggled, in shy, solitary petition, 
after this mountain-removing faith in a paradox, which his 
mind refused when confronted with surrounding reahties. 

Juliette had pulled herself together. She was leading an en- 
urely different life. Now she would be up just after sunrise, 
and dressed so quickly that she managed to help Maink An- 
taram with her morning distribution of milk. From there, as 
fast as possible to the hospital. After all, it was the only thing 
she could do. Gabriel had been perfectly right. No one can 
go on living indefinitely as a "distinguished foreigner” — in a 
void. 

A superficial observer would find Juliette easy enough to 
criticize. What did this snob really expect? What had she, 
who resisted her husband’s world after fifteen years of married 
life, really got of her own to be so proud of? Were there not 
in Turkey, at that very minute, many other European women 
heroically engaged in efforts to help the slaughtered, outraged 
Armenian people? Was there not Karen Jeppe in Urfa, who 
hid refugees and kept back the saptiehs, with her arms spread 
out across her door, till they took themselves off, ginri» after 
all they dared not kill a Danish woman? Had not German 
and American missionaries found their way with consid- 

358 



erable hardship as far even as Deir eZ'Zor, and into the 
desert, bringing such help as they could muster to the lost 
and famished children and widows of murdered men? None 
of these had married an Armeman, none had borne an Arme- 
nian son. Such strictures might sound extremely just, and yet 
they would be unjust to Juliette. She alone on Musa Dagh 
suffered with far more than the general suffering; she suffered 
worst of all from herself. Juliette was too miserable to be snob- 
bish. Being French, she had a certain natural rigidity. Latins, 
for all their surface pliancy, arc set and rigid within them- 
selves. Their form is a perfection. They have perfected it. 
Northerners may still have something of the vagueness and 
infinite plasticity of cloud-shapes; the French as a rule hate 
nothing so much as to have to leave their country, get out of 
their skin. Juliette shared in a high degree this set quality of 
her race. She lacked that power of intuitive sympathy which 
usually goes with formless uncertainties. Had Gabriel, from 
the first days of their marriage, been firmly resolved to guide 
her gently in the direcuon of his own people, perhaps it would 
all have worked out differently. But Gabriel himself had been 
"parisicn” — one of that race of assimilators who, when they 
thought of Armema, thought of her as a classical exemplar, 
but as not quite real. What little he had managed to see of 
Armenians, the exated pohtical contacts he had made in the 
year of the Turkish revolution, his engagement of Avakian 
to teach Stephan — ^nonc of all that had been enough to give 
Juliette the right perspective, far less to bring her over to his 
side. For fifteen years she had really only been aware that she 
had married an Ottoman subject What it really means to be 
Armenian, the duties and destiny it entails, she had had to 
discover a few weeks previously, with appalling suddenness. 
So that really Gabriel himself was largely to blame for Juliette’s 
attitude. 

In these days she felt indescribably alone. She, the glittering; 
the dominant, the eternally vivid, who had never once failed 

359 



to be admired, was now merely put up with—worse still, not 
even noticed! She was sure she was getting ugher every day, 
surrounded by such general disapprobation. And out of all 
this was born a fresh agony— France! Whatever war-news had 
managed to find its way to Musa Dagh had its source only 
in Turkish newspapers. It was weeks — ^months — out of date. 
Juliette knew only of French defeats, knew that foreign armies 
were on French soil. She, who had never troubled her head 
with politics, to whom the general fate had been a bore, whose 
own affairs had appeared supreme to her, was now suddenly 
overwhelmed with devouring fears for “la patrie.” Her mother, 
with whom she did not get on, her sisters, with whom she had 
almost quarrelled, came infimtely close to her in her dreams. 
School friends appeared, who cut Juliette, although she kept 
going down on her knees to them. Now and again she en- 
countered her dead father— frock<oated, and distinguished, 
with the little red ribbon in his buttonhole. He stared in some 
amazement at juhette, and kept repeating his pet expression; 
"C« choses ne se font pas." 

But, though her mghts got worse and worse, Juliette was 
always punctual on duty. She had no desire to be “human,” 
in the way Gabriel had advised. All she wanted was to over- 
come her solitude, her lost dismay. She served with the greatest 
devotion. Conquermg her olfaaory sense, Juliette would kneel 
down beside the patients, those half-unconscious old people^ 
on the rough mats; strip their feverish bodies, wash ofi the 
dirt, bathe their crumpled faces in toilet water, whatever was 
left of It. In those days she sacrificed much. She gave up most 
of her own underwear, let them use her sheets to make cradles 
for suckhng babes, hammocks for the sick. For herself she 
only kept “the striedy necessary.” But, no matter how Juliette 
might exert herself, there was no gratitude in the dull fish- 
eyes of the fever patients, the hostile eyes of those in health; 
they would acknowledge nothing from her— the foreigner. 
Even Gabriel had not a word of praise^ he who ten days ago 

360 



Jiad acemed «o dtivalrous. Was ^ a dead encumbrance even 
to him? 

And Gabriel and Stephan, the only beings close to her in the 
world, were near, and yet as far away from her as though 
an ocean lay between. They scarce^ bothered even to think 
of her. They eyed her with thinly veiled animosity. Neither 
could manage to seem affectionate. They did not love 
her. 

And all the rest? The people hated her. Juliette felt the 
hate in their staring faces, their sudden silence, the instant she 
was seen in camp. The women’s dislike of her scorched her 
back as she went along past the staring groups. 

Here, forsaken of all, she would have to die; more alonr 
and wretched than the wretchedest person on Musa Dagh. 

At such welling moments of self-pity Juliette was careful 
not to admit to herself that perhaps she was not really so 
alone. Gonzague never left her side, having perceived the 
misery in her eyes. When and wherever he could, he redoubled 
his attentive services. Now more than ever he had become to 
Juliette the son of a French mother, a “civilized being,’’ akin 
to her, almost her relation. But for the last few days some- 
thing had seemed to impenl their good understanding — some- 
thing not only from him, but from her as well. He had not 
overstepped one limit. But for the first time, without shedding 
an atom of his respect, he had made her perceive in him a 
desire. This feeling of being on the brink, this close proximity 
without contact, brought fresh confusion on Juliette. She had 
to think often of Gonzague. Added to which, in spite of his 
French mother, he still “made her feel queer.” People who 
are always in perfect control of themselves, who can wait for 
ever, are lincanny. Gonzague was one of those who in anger 
turn white, but never crimson. 

This change in Gonzague had begun by his losing every 
day a litde more of the reticence which she had never uiider- 
stood. He began telling her things about his life. 

361 



Every morning Juliette spent three or four hours in the 
hospital'hut, usually till the patients had got their dinners. 
As a rule, at about that time, C^nzague Mans came in to fetch 
her. If she was still not ready, he waited. His vratchful eyes fol- 
lowed her movements. She fdt herself assaulted by those 
eyes, as mdeed she was. For when, not without some vague 
intention, she hngcred over hospital tasks, he would come 
straight up to her, and whisper: “That’s enough I Leave it for 
now, Juhctte. You’re far too good for work of this sort.” 

Then, with soft resolution, he would force her away from 
the hospital-hut. She was glad he did so. Since Gonzague had 
no dudes in camp, and had not applied for any to the Coun- 
cil, he had spent his time in the discovery of some very charm- 
ing natural paths, places in which to rest and look out to sea, 
along the coast side of the Damlayik. They were every bit as 
beautiful, he declared, as the views along the Riviera. 

Now Juhette and Gonzague sat every day side by side, at 
odd hours, in cool nooks or sheltered clearings or on the 
closely wooded promontories, of this “Riviera,” which, cut 
off from the plateau by a wide belt of myrde, rhododendron, 
or arbutus bushes, extends in a long up and down hne, on the 
edge of those gigantic walls which drop sheer into the sea. 
They both felt profoundly isolated. Who would ever miss them 
— ^the two foreigners? 

On that day, August 14, the fifteenth day on Musa Dagh, 
Gonzague seemed entirely changed. Juliette had never yet seen 
him so sad, so boyishly sad, so incomprehensibly overshadowed. 
His eyes— in which there were no distances, even when they 
looked at a horizon — stared out, Juhette felt, into infinity. In 
reality he stared at a definite point, though to be sure, a jutting 
bend of the mountain hid it from view. His thoughts were 
on the plain at the mouth of the Orontes, where a big alcohol 
factory ghttered in sunlight. Juliette’s question, which expressed 
her sensations, not his, was therefore quite beside the point: 
“Are you homesick, Gonzague?” 

362 



He laughed shortly, and she, ashamed, perceived how pain- 
fully empty her question was. She thought of the life which 
Gonzague had rdated bit by bit, lightly discounting it, as 
ironical as though it half concerned him, were in faa the least 
important part of himself. 

His father, a banker in Athens, had seduced his mother, a 
French governess. When the child was still not four, there 
had come a crash. Papa had vanished to America, leavmg 
Maman with her baby, but nothing else. But she had been fond 
enough of her deserter to contrive, with the uttermost diffi- 
culty, to cross the Atlantic in pursuit of him, taking little 
Gonzague with her. There, though she never succeeded in 
gettmg on the tracks of the right man, she had, in the course 
of pursuit, found another. He was an elderly umbrella manu- 
facturer from Detroit, who had married Maman and adopted 
Gonzague. 

“So you see,” Gonzague had said, “I’ve a perfect right to use 
two names. But, with my kind of appearance, I feel that it’d be 
all wrong to call myself Gonzague MacWaverly, so I stick 
to Maris.” 

He had given her very serious reasons for this. Gonzague’s 
unfortunate mother had not been happy with her umbrella- 
maker. They separated. She had to leave the house in Detroit, 
and Gonzague wandered from boarding-school to boarding- 
school, till the age of fifteen. At about that time, by chance, 
he had learned the name of his real father, who meanwhile 
had managed to recoup himself. The old man was becoming 
conscience-stricken, since Gonzague’s mother bad died in the 
pauper ward of a New York hospital. He had sent the boy, 
with a litde money, back to Athens, to some relations. Of the 
following years (^nzague had spoken very shordy. They 
had been neither good nor bad, and certainly not in the least 
interesdng. Not till very late, after a Wretched childhood and 
seedy youth, had he managed, in Paris, to find his bent— that 
is to say he had discovered that he possessed a few mediocre 

363 



and very ordinary abilities, useful enough at least to esodlki 
him to push his way through the world. For some years he 
had lived in Turkey, since the help of his father’s Athens 
relatives had taken him to Istanbul and Smyrna. In Istanbul 
he had acted as correspondent for American papers, which 
he supplied both with news and articles, describing life in the 
interior. This he had supplemented, whenever things were at 
their seediest, by rehearsing the choruses of fifth-rate Italian 
and Viennese touring companies. In the end he had man- 
aged to get attached to a cabaret manager from Pera, as 
accompanist, to tour through darkest Turkey with a troupe of 
very tawdry dancers and singers. 

All this sounded perfectly genuine. What, after all, could 
have been left out, or embelhshed, in such sordid and likely 
little incidents? These meagre excerpts from his life had been 
given as carelessly, by Gonzague, as though they were be- 
neath his notice — ^the base prelimmaries to a real life, of which 
his eyes spoke as they rested on Juliette. She believed he was 
telling her the truth, yet his truth seemed to cancel itself out. 
For a second she suspected that Gonzague had another, equally 
colourless life in reserve for every woman he met. 

“How many women,” she investigated, “were there in that 
concert party which you toured with as far as Alexandretta?" 

The thought of his troupe seemed so to annoy him that he 
almost answered her with a growl. “About eighteen to twenty, 
I imagine.” 

“Well, there arc sure to have been some young and pretty 
ones. Didn’t you care for any of them, Gonzague?” 

He shook off such a suggestion in amazement. “Actresses 
have a very thin and difficult time. And professionals take 
love as part of then job, and refuse to do overtime.” 

Juliette’s curiosity was not so easily dispelled. “But you 
lived some months in Alexandretta. A filthy httle port. . . 

“Alexandretta isn’t nearly so bad as you seem to think, 
Juliette. There are a number of quite civilized Ar menian 

364 



bn^es living there, with delightful houses and big gardens.” 

“Oh, I see. So it was one of those families made you stay so 
long.” 

Gonzague did not deny that a certain young lady in Alex- 
andretta had caused him to break his contract with the cabaret 
manager. His vague descriptions oddly suggested Iskuhi to 
Juliette— a painted, bedizened Iskuhi, hung with cheap jewel- 
lery, which, however, seemed out of keeping with her image. 
Gonzague refrained from any further description of his ac- 
perience, declared the whole thmg to have been a mistake — 
wiped out and forgotten. It had only had this about it, that it 
had brought him, via Beilan, to Yoghonoluk, and shown him 
the way to Villa Bagradian. 

Juliette reflected on Gonzague’s position in the world and 
began to feel less cruelly lonely. Could there be a more ulu- 
mate method of belonging nowhere than his? He had re- 
solved to take a reticent share in Juliette’s fate, in her probable 
death, without winking an eyelash, for no thanks, as though 
it were not worth mentioning, as though it were bang done 
out of sheer politeness I And besides Gonzague had a hundred 
diousand times less to gain here than Juliette. The word 
"nostalgie” which she had uttered a little while ago — ^how it 
troubled her now I Those eyes had only emptiness to look out 
on. Npw Juhette saw that this young man, who boasted a 
microscopic memory, seemed to have no memories to fall back 
on, or only such as cancelled out. This young man who, with 
tense reserve, had shown ha such devoted considaation, had 
never himself recaved any love. He sat like a boy beside ha, 
on a smooth rock, almost against ha, from shoulda to knee. 
But he did not touch ha, still left the suggestion of empty 
space between them. This blade-like space, composed of virtue 
and self-conquest, scorched ha almost. Gonzague said nothing. 
In Juliette’s heart a very perilous, deheious pity was welling 
up. 

“Gonzague?” she asked, and was startled by ha own nng- 

3 ^ 



«ng voice. Slowly he turned to her. It was like a sunbeam 
Softly she took his hand. Only to stroke it. Then— there was 
nothing else to be done I — ^her face, her mouth advanced a 
little. And Gonzaguc’s eyes flickered and died. The last ex- 
pectant alertness was extinguished in them. He let Juliette 
come close, before, with a sudden jerk, pulling her to him. 
She whimpered sofdy under his kiss. Her youth had slipped 
away from this faithful wife, without her ever once having 
discovered of what vagrant desire she could be capable. Yet 
instantly she grew conscious of a pain, which seemed as 
though it would split her head. It was the same, almost 
hypnotic, headache which she had felt in the reception-room 
of the villa, that night Gonzague had played the piano so 
morosely. She thrust the man away, to collect her whole force 
of resistance. A thought shot up in her: “He didn’t take my 
hand. It was I who took his.” And, behind that thought, a 
second towered: “For weeks he’s been deliberately leading me 
on, so that 7 might begin it, and not he.” In the next instant, 
since Gonzague tighdy clasped and kissed her again, her 
powers of resistance seemed all to melt. The pain was an in- 
tolerable ecstasy. A crimson darkness with, far down in her, 
a last, thin glint of terror; “I’m lost!” 

For only now, in these, his kisses, did this so reticent young 
man, this tenderly gallant escort, become the real Gonzague. 
No longer the adroit child of nothing, but a force, of which 
she had had no inkling, which might make her either 
supremely happy or miserable. His mouth, entrancing and 
revengeful, drew out of her secrets she had not known. 

He only let her go when a terrific dm suddenly startled 
them. They leapt away from one another. Juliette’s heart beat 
so, she could scarcely breathe. “My hair’s all rumpled,” she 
thought, and found it as hard to lift her hands as though they 
had been heavy implements. What is it? The Gre^ sup- 
ported her. They sought out the infernal din. In a few steps 
he knew what it was. 



“It’s the camp donkeys. They’ve all gone madl’’ 

And, indeed, as they came to the nearby tethering-ground, 
a kind of nightmare met their eyes. These honest donkeys 
seemed transmogrified mto a set of wildly fabulous beasts. 
They tugged at halters, reared, danced on hind-legs, lashed 
out on all sides. Foam dribbled out of their soft lips, their 
eyes looked glassy with fright. The long sounds that came 
shivering out of them sounded more like trilling neighs than 
the harmless up and down of a donkey’s speech. Some craz- 
ing phantom seemed to have started up before them. It was 
not a phantom. Their animal, premonitory instinct had sensed 
a reality, in the very second before it happened. Far away, 
beyond the North Saddle, a broad rumbling — almost in the 
same instant the sound seemed to have come a little closer. 
There followed a short, sharp crash and, south of the Town 
Enclosure, fairly high up, a snowy smoke-cloud. Suddenly the 
donkeys ceased their din. Soft brayings and fiutings melted 
gently into silence. People were runmng out of their huts. 
Very few realized what was happening, or that the dainty 
cloudlet above the mountain was a shrapnel-burst. 

It had also roused Gabriel in the camp. He was tired, having 
scarcely slept on the night before. Disquieting messages kept 
coming in from the forward positions. There could be no 
doubt that Turkish spies had been around the trenches these 
last two mghts, trying to slip in past the sentries. For tonight, 
therefore, Gabriel had sounded the great alarm, and placed 
standing patrols. As, towards midday, he sat on the bench at 
his headquarters, trying to snatch a few minutes’ rest, he was 
set upon by an agomzed day-dream. Juliette lay dead, on the 
wide bed of their Paris bedroom. She lay across it. She was 
worse than dead, she was frozen stiff, one single block of 
faintly flesh-coloured ice. He would have to lie beside her, 
to melt her corpse. . . . 

Heavily, he shook off this nightmare. It was clear; he was 

367 



behaving badly to Juliette. Cowardice had been making him 
avoid her, the Lord knew how long. Even though his present 
life and duties left him without a second to spare, that was 
no reason to satisfy his consaence. He decided therefore, until 
tonight, to hand over the command to Nurhan and spend that 
afternoon with Juliette. 

She was not in the tent. Iskuhi was just coming out of hers. 
Brother Aram was with Hovsannah. She did not want to 
disturb that married pair. Gabriel begged Iskuhi to stay with 
him, till Juliette should have come home. They sat down to- 
gether, on the short-cropped grass of Three-Tent Square. 
Gabriel made an effort to discover what it was had chan^xl 
Iskuhi so remarkably. Yes, of course— today she was not 
wearing one of the dresses Juliette had given her, but a wide 
flowered gown, made of some flowing, flimsy material, high 
at the neck, and with puffed sleeves. It made her look very old- 
fashioned, and yet it was unlike Armenian dress. Iskuhi’s 
fragile shape had often seemed to him meagre and wasted- 
looking. But this scolloped, bunched robe lent her a gende, 
hovering fullness, and hid her lame arm. Never before had her 
serious little face been so well framed, so Gabriel thought, as 
it was by the wide silk shawl, which she had flung over her 
head, to keep the sun off. He noted, in surprise, that Iskiihi’s 
lips were full and sensuous. “She ought to be wearing a red 
veil,” It occurred to him. And, since this was his hour of 
fatigue and drowsiness, pictures from his remotest days of life 
came up in his mind; 

Yoghonoluk, grandfather’s house. A wide, damask cloth, 
laid out for breakfast, on the soft turf of the lawn. Everyone 
in respectful attendance on the arrival of old Avetis Bagradian, 
to this ceremonious first meal of the day. The silver kettle 
steams on a tripod. Baskets piled up with apricots and grapes, 
melons on their flat dishes. Wooden platters, with new-laid 
eggs, honey, and “apricot leather.” Thin cakes of bread, wait- 
ing under a spotless napkin to be broken by the master of the 

568 



houses after prayers. Gabrid is dght, and wearing the same 
kind of entari-ldlt that Stephan wears today. If only they’d 
hurry up with breakfast! Then he could sally fort^ on to 
Musa Dagh, to hunt out great secrets. Meanwhile he looks 
down shyly at the damask-folds. Perhaps a big snake is hiding 
under them! A golden rustle announces Grandfather’s ap- 
proach. And, strangdy, his grandfather is himself no more 
than this — this golden sound; he gives it forth, he never 
emerges from it. His gold lorgnon on its ribbon, his white 
pointed beard, his black and yellow morning-robe, his red 
Russia-leather shoes, never come into sight; his image remains 
hidden, though forcefully present. On the other hand, Gabriel 
could clearly see all the women slowly lifting their veils above 
their heads, reverently turning their backs on the master, as 
custom ordains. Had this been a real memory, or only a dream 
made up of fragments pieced wrongly together ? Gabriel could 
not be sure. But in any case, for no apparent reason, Iskuhi had 
managed to weave herself into this carpet of his childhood. 
She sat facing him on the grass. He, lost in the study of her 
face, took a long time to remember that he must say some 
thing. 

"I suppose you’re fonder of your brother than you are of 
anyone dse m the world?” He made it almost sound as though 
he were blammg her. 

The first Turkish shell dropped a hundred feet south of the 
Town Enclosure, under the foremost, jutting point of the 
Damlayik. He hurried there, in long, swift strides. On the 
way he met Dr. Altouni, ridmg a donkey. The old man had 
to get down. Bagradian thrashed and kicked this beast till it 
brought him to North Saddle at a most unusual gallop. 

Tins time the Turks had prepared thdr stroke. The bimbashi- 
commandant of Antioch, that comfortable, boyishly rosy gen- 
tleman, with the htde, elderly, sleepy eyes, led the onset in 
person. Strangely enough, his adjutant, the hatchet-faced and 

369 



resolute yus-bashi, had taken short leave at about this juncture, 
and gone to Aleppo, to be quite clear of responsibility. Since 
the bimbashi’s wise and peaceable suggestions had not pre- 
vailed in council against the Kaimakam, nothing now re- 
mained but to sally forth, m all possible haste, against Musa 
Dagh. His annoyance and rancour against his enemies lent 
the comfortable gentleman energy and unexpected ilan. He 
spent nearly the whole of one day in the telegraph office at 
Antakiya. Its Morse apparatus was set in motion in three 
direcuons, Alexandretta, Aleppo, and Eskereh, to muster up 
all the small local' garrisons and gendarmerie posts situated 
within the district frontiers. In four days the pordy colonel 
had drummed together a fair contingent — ^about a thousand 
rifles — ^to back his artillery. It was composed of the two com- 
panies of regulars, detached, in the Antakiya barracks; two 
platoons of the same regiment, from smaller towns; a big posse 
of saptiehs; and lastly a number of sharpshooters, chetteh ir- 
regulars from the mountains around Hammam. He made use 
of the half-battery which had recently trundled into the 
garrison. 

Meanwhile scouts had investigated the trenches on the 
Damlayik, if not reliably and completely, at least in part. The- 
superstition was still unbroken that there were twenty thou- 
sand armed Armenians. So the bimbashi had enough arms 
and saptiehs at his disposal to make the smoking-out of this 
rebels’ nest a possible matter of hours. His taede would con- 
sist in a fully covered advance and sudden attack. That was 
essential. And both covered advance and sudden attack were 
well contrived. Every observer on Musa Dagh had been de- 
ceived. The colonel had split up his forces into approximately 
equal divisions, which were to operate independently of each 
other. The first marched on the night of August 13 with every 
possible precaution into Suedia and encamped, neatly di^ 
posed and concealed, in the ruins of Seleucia, under the South 
Bastion. The other corps, comprising the commander and 

370 



his artillery, came along a stretch of the highroad, Antakiya> 
Beilan, and turned o£E it up wretched mule tracks into the 
mountains. But here the bimbashi’s strategic plan failed to 
“click.” It proved very difficult to get the two big howitzers 
uphill, even though two men were kept continually shoving 
at the spokes of either wheel, while others had to toil with 
the heavy barrels of unlimbered guns for fifteen miles on the 
irduous hiUade. The sumpter mules, in teams, had proved 
themselves almost useless for gun-dragging. It meant a delay 
of ten hours. This force, which had begun its march half a 
day earlier than the other, only reached those heights of Musa 
Dagh which extend northwards of the Saddle, towards midday 
on August 14, instead of m the night of the previous day. So 
that the double attack, timed for the first hour after sunrise, 
was not delivered. The captain in charge of the southern 
corps, who had not dared to let them show their faces outside 
their hiding-holes in the scorching ruins, till they got the pre- 
arranged signal (the first shell), was already fagged out by 
their long vigil in the pitiless sun. A fifteen-hour march up 
mountain tracks, without having rested the night before, only 
interrupted by three short halts, lay behind it. The colonel 
should have said to himself: “lH give them a rest for today, 
and send word to the captain at Suedia to put off the attack till 
early tomorrow.” And, considering how easygoing he was, any- 
one might have betted a hundred to one that this would be the 
old gentleman’s decision. Yet exactly the opposite happened. 
Easygoing people are often also the impatient ones. If they 
find themsdves entangled in something they dishke having 
to do, they get it over as quickly as possible. This bimbashi 
ordered the artillery mulasun to bring his guns at once into 
position, had a very hasty meal served out to the men, and, an 
hour later, led his companies, in long, thin skirmishing order, 
against the Armenian Saddle trenches, where first they kept a 
very respectful distance, as quiet as mice, in the gulhes, behind 
rocks and trees. 


371 



The bimbashi cursed the Kaimakam, the yus4)ai^t, the 
general in charge of transport, who, instead of proper moutuain 
artillery, had sent him these huge, unwieldy howitzcrsr— 
above all did he curse His Excellency Jemal Pasha, for a 
“sour-faced, humpbacked swindler.” In his opinion all these 
political officers of Ittihad were nothing but a set of jumped- 
up traitors and scum. It was they who had conspired against 
the old Sultan, and were keeping the new one prisoner in his 
palace. Ridiculous subordinate officers, who promoted them- 
selves generals, Excellencies, pashas I Once fellows of that 
description wouldn’t have got as far as yus-bashi* And all this 
disgraceful pother with the Armenians was simply due to 
Ittihad swine. In Abdul Hamid’s golden days there might, of 
course, have been an occasional set on the Armenians, but 
never the sort of thing that such a highly placed officer as he, 
the bimbashi, would be asked to command. The tired and 
irritable old gendcman waited with his staff for the first shelL 
He had ordered the lieutenant in charge of the howitzers to 
begin by dropping a couple into the living-quarters of the 
Armenians. Not even the so-called war-office “maps" of these 
Ittihad swindlers were accurate and the shells had to be aimed 
at the Damlayik by the distances marked on these. The bim- 
bashi reckoned that shells in the camp would cause panic 
among the women and children, and so dimmish the men’s 
morale. 

This calculation was shrewd enough. The howitzers, how- 
ever, succeeded more by accident than aim. Out of twelve 
shots, three fell into the Town Enclosure. These shells not 
only damaged some of the huts but wounded three women, 
an old man, and two children, luckily not very seriously. 
But the (hrcct hit of a shell destroyed the grain depot, set fire 
to, and burned up, all that was left of the cereals, together 
with what remained of tobacco, sugar, and rice. 'The depot 
crackled and blazed; it was a miracle that the (Ud not 

spread to the huts, a litde way off. And the people’s mnfiisjnq 

37 * 



v»s eiren worse than this disaster. On the decads also the 
£re worked a ten-fold alarm. All who were oS duty rushed 
to their posts. Nurhan, “the Lion,” within ten minutes had 
the trenches entirely on the defensive. The orderlies and spies 
of the cohort of youth were soon assembled behind the lines. 
When Gabriel came galloping on his donkey, he found alj 
parts of his machine in full working order. A few minutes 
later the first scout came runnmg in with reports from the 
South Bastion. So that this Turkish raid had not quite suc- 
ceeded. It encountered surprised, but resolute, defenders. 

This was the day of Sarkis ICilikian’s triumph, and of that of 
the South Bastion. In this region the enemy was still with- 
out experience. Turkish spies had not dared to advance too 
far into the wide, bare half-circle of this declivity, with its 
stony slopes and terraces of boulders. The captain in charge 
did not even know whether, behind the jagged blocks of 
these dominant rock-towers, there was a garrison. The Moham- 
medan population of the thickly peopled plain of the Orontes, 
the inhabitants of the market-towns of Suedia, El Eskel, and 
Ycdidje, excited by this war on the mountain, affirmed that^ 
for many days, nothing had stirred among these rocks, that 
. no fire was seen at night there. But the company leader was 
cautious, and assumed Armenian entrenchments, at any rate 
on the southern edge of the Damlayik, even though appear- 
ances might suggest none. He had long since divid^ his 
men into frontal attackers and a surrounding-party. The first 
was to be composed of regular troops, the second of chettehs 
and saptiehs. While the ones climbed straight up the slope, 
the others, directly opposite, where the half-circle of mountain 
verged on the sea, above the hill-nest Habaste, were to descend 
pn the rear of what they supposed the Armenian positions. 
The Turkish captain did not spread out his men in skirmish- 
ing order, but disposed them in long single, file, to present as 
narrow a surface for fire as possible. Since the temple ruins 

373 



of Seleucia, which had given cover to the troops, stood on a 
wide ridge, about two hundred feet above sea-level, the 
attackers had only a bare heap of stones, of about the same 
height, to get across, to come to the edge of the strong dope 
crowned by the South Bastion. This slope was not unassailably 
steep, afforded hnng-cover on every inch of it, and was there- 
fore, in the opinion of the bimbashi, far better designed for 
attack than any of the wooded sides of the Damlayik, which 
behind each tree-stem gave firmg-cover to the Armenians. 
And besides, from the village street, visible at every point of 
the mountain, the advance up the hill could not have been 
camouflaged. 

In the South Bastion the command was still very unstable, 
a grave defect in Bagradian’s general scheme of defence. In 
his view, because of the steep, barren ground below it, this 
part was far less menaced by attack than either the North 
Saddle or the ilex gully. Therefore its fairly numerous garri- 
son contained the undependable underworld of the Damlayik, 
those deserters and pseudo-deserters whom he wanted to keep 
as far as possible from the people. The section leader was an 
ex-regular from Kheder Beg. A slow, phlegmatic peasant, 
unable to assert his authority against these quick-tempered 
recalcitrants. Teacher Oskanian, the general superintendent 
appointed by the war committee, had made himself ridiculous 
on the first day by his pedagogic ruthlessness and pomposity. 
The exacting dwarf was quite unable to inspire in these hard- 
bitten men, with whom life itself had dealt so drastically, the 
respect he considered his due. It is therefore obvious that the 
strongest personality of this sector, Sarkis Kilikian, should 
gradually have gained the upper hand. 

His humiliation by Bagradian seemed to have worked a 
change in the Russian. He no longer played at being a guest 
without obligations, consenting to live in camp for the timg 
being, but submitted without a murmur to its discipline. More, 
he busied himself in his sector as a very inventive fortress 

374 



engineer. He strengthened and raised the loosely piled up 
blocks of limestone, which served as the parapet of their 
trench, though the work took several days of resdess inr 
dustry. He had also contrived a primitive but effective ma- 
chine, which increased to annihilation-pomt their power of re- 
pelling an attack. Behind each of the three walls facing the 
hillside, at a fair distance from one another, he had constructed 
rectangular, gallows-likc erections, made of oak stems. To 
the cross-beam of each of these gallows there hung level, 
fastened by strong ropes, a thick battering-ram, with at the 
end a kind of gigantic table-top, or iron-studded shield. The 
ropes which worked this mechanism could be lengthened or 
shortened, so that the point of impact of the battering-ram 
might be thrust full against the wall. When the very heavy 
shield-plate came hurtling, from a certain distance, pendulum- 
wise, against the stone-heaps, it gained a driving force that no 
human strength could have achieved. 

At the moment when the howitzers opened fire and scouts 
ran in to report that Turkish rifles were beginmng to clamber 
up the slope from above the temple ruins of Seleuaa, the com- 
mandant appointed by Bagradian lost his head completely. 
He crouched down before a chink in his wall of stones, and 
stared at the slope, but could not manage to give an order.'' 
The doughty little Hrand Oskanian turned white as paper. 
His hands shook, so that he could not manage to pull back the 
lock of his carbme, to insert the first cartridge. His stomach 
turned, and the giddy Oskanian nearly toppled. Ten minutes 
ago a threatening Mars, the sombre teacher had no strength 
left, even to get out of the way. His voice failed. He followed 
Sarkis Kilikian like a puppy. So that the leader, with chat- 
tering teeth, stood begging orders of his subordinate. The 
Russian’s agate eyes were as dead as ever. Deserters, and the 
rest of these decads, gathered round him at once, as their 
natural head. No oife paid any further attention to the slow 
witted peasant from I^eder Beg. Kilikian said almost noth 

375 



ing. He strode into the midst of this knot of defenders and 
pointed out those amongst them whom he designed to man 
the rock-towers, stone parapet, and supports. Platforms on 
high heaps of stone had been set up behind the battering-rams. 
Two men climbed each of these, to let the rams hurde against 
the walls at a sign of command. The Russian followed the 
same tactic as Bagradian on August 4. He waited for the 
crucial second. But his dead, patient impassivity was a hun- 
dred times steadier than Gabriel’s. As, at last, the advance- 
guard of the Turks appeared on the edge of the stone-slope, 
he took out his primitive tinder-box, to try to light a cigarette. 
Oskanian beside him twitched and panted: “Now, Kihkian — 
now! Right away.” Having striven in vain to set light to his 
strip of tow, Kilikian’s free hand gripped the teacher, to pre- 
vent his jumping up too early, to give the sign. The Turks, 
lulled into security by their safe clamber, and the utter quiet 
of the mountainside, had begun to get slack. They came into 
line, gossiped, and formed wide groups. Not till they were 
midway up the slope did Kilikian let out a long whistle. The 
battering-rams with their huge shield-plates came thundering 
down on the loosely built-up walls. The lighter stones of the 
uppermost layers, spurting up in a cloud of dust, whizzed 
down like cannonballs, while the heavy limestone blocks of 
the upper structure toppled slowly over, and crashed after 
them, in great, wild leaps, among the Turks. Even these first 
effects were terrible. But now the Armenian mountain itself 
took a hand, to complete the decimation, so cruelly that this 
natural landslide will not be forgotten by future generations 
along the Syrian coast. The defence walls had been built be- 
tween jagged pyramids of rock. The force of the rams shook 
even the natural limestone crown to its foundations, and tore 
huge sections of jagged rock down into the valley. The force 
of this indescribable, stony assault was too much for the many 
loose boulders which strewed the face of the incline. With 
all the terrific hissings and crackhngs of some never before 

376 



experienced surge oE breakers, they began to slide, tearing 
down, in a monstrous deluge of lime and chalkstone, all who 
were still alive among the Turks. It was more than a ghastly 
avalanche of rock. The Damlayik itself seemed to have broken 
loose from its anchor, and to be sliding down. This hailstorm 
spattered on over the ruins of the upper town of Seleucia, 
overturning columns, crushing in ivy-covered walls. For ten 
whole minutes it stiff looked as though the mountain itself 
were seized with an impulse to advance on Suedia — to the 
very mouth of the Orontes. The western group of the Turkish 
coros was grazed by this avalanche, just above the village of 
Habastc. Half the men were lucky enough to get clear. The 
other half were killed or maimed, the village itself in part 
destroyed. In fifteen minutes a sdence, as of death, lay over 
everything. The avalanche stood peacefully and slyly in the 
glare. Dull, crackling thuds from the howitzers came from the 
direction of the Saddle. When every pebble had come to rest, 
Kilikian blew his whistle a second time. The amazed de- 
serters and their comrades began to advance. The whole garri- 
son of the South Bastion, led by the Russian, strolled down the 
slope and, without haste, slaughtered the Turkish wounded 
and stripped them bare. It was done with the most nonchalant 
thoroughness, without a thought for the fierce battle which 
their comrades in the north had to sustain. Sarkis Kilikian 
changed his rags. He put on a brand-new Turkish infantry 
uniform and, in this new kit, in spue of the smears of blood 
on the dead man’s tunic, piostured as though he felt himself 
reborn. But Hrand Oskanian, who had climbed the highest 
point in the line of rocks, was firing in the air hke a lunatic, 
to establish his personal share in this victory. It surprised him 
more and more, as he let off this imposing clatter, to consider 
what a trifle bravery is — to a brave man. 

Neither Gabriel nor the bimbashi was .yet aware of the 
disastrous end of the south division. In the clatter of rifles 

377 



araund them they had both only heard the long rumbk of the 
landslide as a faint thunder in the distance. Here, on the 
Ninth Saddle, the fight was by no means such an easy on^ 
and was going against the Armenians. Whether these how- 
itzers were slulfully manned or merely lucky, the fact re- 
mained that in one hour of slow bombardment, four direct 
hits had blown away part of the chief communication trench, 
and that several mortally wounded men were lying about. 
Gabriel had several umcs been nearly killed by flying splinters. 
His skin felt as rigid as damp leather. He could clearly per- 
ceive that this was not one of his good days. Ideas and de- 
cisions did not come automatic^y as they usually did. He 
might— the thought seared him— have avoided these losses. 
He had delayed too long in giving Chaush Nurhan orders to 
retreat. But at least he had had the intelligence to carry out 
that retreat on the rocky side. The Turks had managed to 
set up an observation post, in a high tree, from which they 
could overlook part of the trench, and correct the aim of their 
artillery. But the stone barricades to the right were beyond 
their survey. Remembering their defeat on August 4, they still 
feared the ste^ and pitiless chfis of Musa Dagh, and no 
longer dared to attempt envelopment. The defenders left their 
trench one by one, and went ducking, with their heads well 
down, past the boulders and jutting rocks of the labyrinth, 
till they came to their second Une of entrenchments, also dug 
along an indentadon. This second trench was today unoccu- 
pied, since Gabriel had not dared to withdraw so much as a 
decad from defence positions, along the edges of the moun- 
tain. He was fairly certain that the Turk would try to attack 
at a third point. His blood froze as he remembered that, if this 
reserve trench, too, should be lost, there would be nothing 
left to prevent the best-thought-out slow death of five thou- 
sand men and women the world had known. The Turkish 
observer did not seem to have nodeed their retreat. Sbfllf 
kept crashing down into the first trench at one-minute inter . 

378 



vals. Since now nothing seemed to stir in it, the bimbashi con- 
sidered it ripe for assaults- There was an endless pause before^ 
in the thick woods of the counter-slope, there arose a wild 
drumming and blare of bugle-calls. Bellowing non-coms and 
officers urged forward the extended lines. Their shouts min- 
with the not entirely fearless shouts of the men. Most of 
them were recruits, snatched away from their Anatolian 
ploughs, who, after a few weeks of hasty training, were under 
fire for the first time. As, however, they saw that their attack 
seemed to be encountering no resistance, their courage rose 
to the point df valour; the wildest of all herd-emotions invaded 
them. They came racketing up the shrub-grown slope, strewn 
with impediments, and stormed the big mam trench with 
rollicking shouts. The colonel saw that things seemed well 
under way and, knowing that this youthful impulse to vic- 
tory must not be allowed to cool off, he left this trench in the 
hands of the second line of saptichs, and drove these intoxi- 
cated storm-troops forward agam, in clustered lines. But he did 
not venture to shift his howitzer-fire any farther forward, 
since he did not want to imperil himself and his men. 

Not only Gabriel, every Armenian fighter in the second 
trench, knew what they risked. The mind, the life, the body of 
each one of them was a dark night, centred round one uB- 
endurably burning focus — to aim straight. Here leader and led 
no longer existed, only the petnfying consciousness; behind 
me the open camp, the women, the children, my people. And 
it was so. . . . They waited, as usual, dll not one bullet could 
miss its mark. Gabriel, too, and Aram Tomasian, fired for the 
first time with complete concentradon on thdr purpose, as 
though in a dream. What happened then happened independ- 
endy of them all, or of Chaush Nurhan — that is to say their 
will was fused into the general will. They did not reload when 
diey had fired their round of five cartridges. As though obey- 
ing one collecdve impulse, the Armenians swung out over the 
top. It was all quite diffierent from what it had b^ on August 

379 



4. No blood'lust, not one shout, could force its way through 
tight-set bps. Heavy, benumbed, four hundred men of all ages 
fell upon their terrified Turkish assailants, who suddenly woke 
from their dream of victory. A bitter hand-to-hand encounter, 
man against man, swung this way and that.' What use were 
the long bayonets on the Mauser rifles? Soon they strewed the 
earth of that strip of ground. Bony Armenian fingers blindly 
sought the gullets of their enemies; strong teeth fastened 
themselves like the fangs of beasts of prey, unconsuously, m 
Turkish throats, to suck the blood of vengeance out of them. 
Step by step, the lines of the company retreated. But the 
saptiehs, whom the old bimbashi — no longer rosy, but now 
apoplectically violet in the face — wanted to throw into batde, 
let him down. The gendarmerie was not, their chief declared, 
a fighung unit. It was there to keep order, and nothing more. 
It was not obhged to take part in assaults against a fully 
armed enemy. Also it was subject to civil, not military, law. 
This naturally so good-tempered bimbashi shouted, like a man 
bereft, that he would have the police chief shot by his plice- 
men. Who was responsible for the whole filthy Armenian 
business in the first place? Officials, and their stinking curs 
of saptiehs, so useful against helpless women and children, 
otherwise good for nothing except to loot. But not all his 
anger helped the poor old man. The outraged saptiehs vacated 
the trench, and withdrew to the counter-slope. Yet even so, 
had not help come at just this minute, it is hard to say how 
this grappling fight might not have ended. 

When news reached the Town Enclosure of the miraculous 
landslide and total destrucuon of the south division, the whole 
people went mad with the lust to kill. Not Ter Haigasun nor 
the Council could keep them back. Their souls, in blasphemous 
presumpuon, became certain that God was on their sidf . 
Meanwhile the orderlies came in, to tell them of the northern 
retreat. The reserve caught up its iron bars, mattocks, and 
pick-axes. Men and women shouted at Ter Haigasun: “To the 

380 



North Saddle.” Today they’d show these Turkish hounds! 
There was nothing Ich for the priest but to place himself at 
the head of this bellowing horde. The freed decads also came 
streaming northwards. These superior, although undisciplined, 
numbers brought the decision within a few minutes. The 
Turks were hurled back, past the conquered trench, as far as 
their original position. Bagradian shouted to Ter Haigasun to 
get the reserve immediately back into camp. If once the hoW' 
itzers started shelling them, they might do unpredictable 
damage, in these dense crowds. The priest succeeded with great 
diiSculty in driving back his stampeding flock. Meanwhile 
dripping with sweat and blood, the defenders feverishly be- 
gan to block up gaps in their mam trench. Gabriel’s rasped 
nerves expected the first shell at any minute. There was still 
more than an hour to twilight. 

The shrapnel, whose thin howl Bagradian fancied he kept 
hearing, still did not come, except in his mind. But another, 
quite unexpected thing happened. A long bugle-call. A lively 
stir along the wooded edge of the counter-slope, and very 
soon the scouts came in, to report that the Turks were in 
quick retreat, by the shortest way, into the valley. There was 
still enough light to watch them encamp on the church square 
at Bitias, and see their colonel riding with his staff, at a sharp 
canter, towards Suedia, via Yoghonoluk and the southern vil- 
lages. This day had been more victorious, above all, more 
blest, than August 4, and yet, that night, there was no festivity, 
not even any warm jubilation, in either the entrenchments or 
the Town Enclosure. 

They had brought in the dead. Now they lay in a row, 
covered over, on the flat square of meadowland which Ter 
Haigasun, because of the depths of its soil, had chosen for their 
mountain burial ground. Since the day of encampment on 
Mi’sa Dagh, only three old people had so far died, whose re- 
cent graves were marked with the roughest limestone blocks, 

381 



painted with three black crosses. These fresh graves must 
suddenly be increased to sixteen, since eight had been killed 
in the hand'to-hand fighting or by shellfire, and five others 
had in the last hours died of wounds. The relatives squatted be* 
side each body. There were only low whimperings, no loud 
cries. All round the hospital-hut lay wounded, with crumpled 
faces and sunken, questioning eyes. Inside, there was only 
room for a few. The old doctor’s hands -were full of work, to 
isdiich he felt himself quite unequal, either by his strength or 
science. Besides Maink Antaram, he had Iskuhi, Gonzague, 
and Juliette to help him. Juhette, on that day especially, worked 
with an almost frantic self-abandonment, as though, by serv- 
ing Its wounded, she could atone for her lack of love for this 
people. She had brought out her well-stocked medicine-chest, 
filled, before they left Paris, under the supervision of the 
Bagradian family doctor. Her lips were white. She kept stum- 
bling as if she might collapse. Then her eyes would seek out 
Gonzague. She did not see in him a lover, but a pitiless moni- 
tor, forcing her to put out more strength than she had. Apothe- 
cary Krikor had also, as behoved him, brought supplies. He 
had only two remedies for wounds — a few bandages and three 
large bottles of tincture of lodme. These were at least useful, 
because the iodine helped to keep from festering those wounds 
over which old Bedros Altouni was forced to growl, and leavf 
them to nature, to heal or not to heal Krikor dealt out his 
panacea with a miserly hand and, as the solution kept ditnin- 
ishmg, diluted his iodine with water. 

Stephan, who with Haik and his gang, was straying about 
over the battlefields, in the graveyard, and round the hospital- 
hut, watched all this piteous confusion. It was his first sight 
of death and dying, of maimed, and of screaming or groaning 
wounded. These horrors made him older by years, but cahner. 
His ardent, immature face clouded with a new kind of hos- 
tility. Now, as he stared out in front of him, he had taken on 
the look of Haik, his rival, yet with a dash of strained, over- 

?82 



wiought excitement. When it was dark, he reported, as his 
duty was, to his father, in the north trench. The Leaders sat 
m a ring round Gabriel. He had the fuses of a grenade and a 
shrapnel in his hand, and was explaining the method of set- 
ting them off. On the grenade the ring was notched with the 
letter P, that is to say shell was designed for a percussion 
fuse. The notching on the shrapnel fuse showed the figure 3, 
den otin g a three-thousand-metre range, the distance between 
the mouth of the gun and the aiming-point. This fuse had 
been picked up about half a mile behmd the front-line trench. 
So that one might, without being too far out, calculate the 
howitzer emplacement as about two thousand metres- beyond 
the Saddle. Gabriel passed round the map of Musa Dagh. He 
had marked the possible point. The guns, if one thought it 
out, could have been set up only in the treeless gully which, 
even towards the north, precipitously skirted Musa Dagh. 
Only that narrow, but open, strip would offer a good field of 
fire to artillery. Everywhere else there were high trees im- 
peding it, which would have required an impossible elevation 
for the gun barrels. Stephan, Haik, and the other boys had 
squatted down behind the men, and were listening breathlessly. 
Nurhan “the Lion” suggested the possibility of attacking the 
battery. Gabriel rejected it at once. Either, he said, the Tufks 
would give up the attempt, and remove these howitzers to the 
valley, or they had a new plan of attack, and would shift the 
emplacement in the night. In either case, to attack the guns 
would be unnecessary, and highly dangerous, since a strong 
protecting force, perhaps even a whole infantry platoon, with 
plenty of cover, could practically wipe out the attackers. The 
Turks had shown what it meant to attack in the open. But 
he, Bagradian, refused to risk another Armenian life. Nurhan 
still stubbornly clung to his idea. It led to a vehement dispute, 
diis way and that, till Bagradian sharply closed the discus- 
sion: 

“Chaush Nurhan, you’re fagged out, and so are we all, and 

383 



no good for anything. That’s enough I Let’s get some sleep. 
In a few hours we’ll see what else we can do.” 

But the boys were not fagged out; they were ready for 
anything. Stephan got leave to spend the night in the trenches. 
His father, who had already spread out his rugs, gave one to 
him. Gabriel had lost all desire for a bed and enclosed space 
in which to sleep. Tonight it was too stuffy to breathe freely 
even in the open. The exhausted men slept like the dead. One 
of them trod out the fires before they lay down. The double 
guard of sentries went to their posts, to keep a sharp look-out 
on every inlet to the Saddle. The boys, like a noiseless flight 
of birds, sped away among the rock-barricades. A bright 
August moon was already well in its second quarter. They 
stood in its sharp light in a close ring, among chalky boulders, 
chirruped and whispered. At first it was mere aimless, point- 
less chattering, in the bright, sharp light. But they, too, in the 
depths of their adventurous souls, were restless with the same 
itching purpose that filled young Stephan. It began in ‘mere 
childish curiosity — ^“to have a look at the guns.” Haik’s band 
comprised a few of the brightest of the scouts’ group. Couldn’t 
one go on a reconnoitring expedition, without having expressly 
been given orders by Hapeth Shatakhian or Avakian ? Stephan 
threw out the enticing question. His first mad sally into the 
orchards had raised his prestige to the height of Haik’s. Haik, 
with the ironical indulgence of the invincibly strong, had be- 
gun to tolerate the rise of the Bagradian brat. Sometimes, in 
his mocking protection, there was even a faint suggestion of 
amiability. Haik signed to the rest to wait for him without 
getting excited. He wanted first to see what was on, up there. 
He, whose clear affinity with nature was far stronger than that 
of any among them, quietly dismissed would-be companions. 
He vanished soundlessly, to appear again suddenly in the 
swarm, not half an hour later, with the news that you could 
sec the guns as clear as if it were daylight. His eyes glinted 
as he said it. They were big, beautifully golden-looking things 

384 



with a distance of about six paces between them. He had not 
counted more than twenty gunners, all asleep, and not one 
officer. There was only one sentry post. 

Haik had counted accurately. And the fate of these howitzers 
was the reason why the poor, rosy-cheeked bimbashi was 
obhged to consider himself lucky that he could end his days as 
a paymaster’s official, attached to the Anatolian railway, in- 
stead of as a General-Pasha. He swore a hundred oaths be- 
fore the court martial, by Allah’s mercy, that he had posted 
ah the usual guards, as set down in the Sultan’s regulations; 
that criminal saptiehs and Chcttchs had gone lounging oif 
without his leave. This truth could be proved, but it did not 
help the poor old gentleman in the least. Had it not been his 
duty to post a platoon of regulars round his guns? But the 
bimbashi’s bad luck had not been confined to this single 
blunder. The artillery lieutenant, in direct contradiction of 
orders, without having left one decently trustworthy non- 
commissioned officer, had followed the infantrymen, and gone 
down to the valley to fetch up next day’s ordre de batadle. 
In addition to which, the donkeymen, pressed into service as 
gun-draggers, had all wandered back to their villages, having 
drawn the very logical conclusion that nobody could want 
them during the night. Such discipline in the field, nor to 
mention its unheard-of results, made the sentence an un- 
usually mild one. Strangely and fortunately enough, Jemal 
Pasha, “the sour-faced, humpbacked swindler,” who as a rule 
insisted on having everything explained to him in detail, 
refrained from investigating personally. This may have been 
due to that general’s preoccupation with Suez— or to some 
other reason, connected with the ugly Jemal’s attitude towards 
Enver, the popular idol of Istanbid. 

Haik and his two best scouts crept on cats’-feet along the 
narrow shelf of rock on the farther side of the Saddle. Stephan 
followed them, rather more clumsily. The one-legged Hagop 
had naturally had to stay behind. This time it had been 

385 



Stephan, his friend, who sharplf told that ambitious crqiple 
to stop pestering. That night no Sato hung around the e(^ 
of the pack. She had something better to do. Stephan and 
Haik earned guns and cartridges, borrowed from the piled* 
up arms and cartridge-belts of the decads. This day was to 
decide their chronic rivalry, a dispute which had gone on 
some time. Whenever Stephan, insisting on his excellent mark* 
manship, had boasted that at Bfty paces he could shoot the face 
out of a playing-card, Haik had displayed the coldest scorn: 
“Can’t ever stop bragging, can you?” Here was a chance to 
show the cocksure Haik that Stephan might have bragged 
vainly of much else, but at least not of being a good shot. And 
of this Stephan gave gruesome proof. 

Haik guided the town-bred Stephan through rhododendron 
thickets to the very edge of the battery emplacement. Ten 
paces off them snored the sleepers. Sentries gazed vacantly up 
at the night sky, starless in the bright moonlight. Time and 
space extended infinitely, without misgivings, and full of pa* 
tience. First Stephan tried several branches, to get a really 
comfortable rest for his barrel. He aimed very long, and with- 
out excitement, as though the fiesh-and-blood hgures over 
there had been wooden dummies m the shooting-booth of a 
country fair. This child of European culture was impelled 
by only one sensation — the desire to get the human, white, 
moon*lit forehead of a guard before his barrel, well between 
the sights. He pulled die trigger without a qualm, calmly 
heard the report, felt the kick and, delighted with hims elf , 
saw the man sink down. As the sleepers stumbled to their 
feet, not yet quite knowing what had happened, he aimed 
more qui^ly, but not a jot less steadily, pulling the trigger 
twice, three times, four times, tugging at the breech with a 
quick, strong jerk. These fifteen Turks were redifs, elderly 
men, who scarcely knew the meaning of the campaign. They 
ran about in confusion. Five already lay in pools of blood. No 
visible enemy. These staid, respectable peasants, forced intothe 

386 



atmy, did ast seek cover— they rushed, in the wildest peD> 
mell, into the wood— far, far, never to return! Haik wildly shot 
off his whole five bullets after them. Not one hit — as lister 
Stephan could note contemptuously. The howitzers, the 
lindier, the dragging-cart, the shell-locker, the rifles, the 
mules, were all abandoned. Thus did one fourteen-year-old 
schoolboy, with five cartridges, avenge the million-fold 
decimation of his race upon harmless peasants forced into 
arms— upon the wrong people as is always the case in war 
revenge. 

When the outpost sentries heard shots crackle through the 
quiet of this moony night, they aroused their chief. But the 
s^oolboys, huddled among the rocks, awaiting Haik and 
Stephan, became panic-stricken. They felt responsible. With 
loud cries and waving arms, they came rushing out. But only 
Hagop, with all his frenzied, stubborn nimbleness, came hop- 
ping to Gabriel, who had started up, still dazed with alarm. 
The cripple pointed wildly at the counter-slope, with repeated 
cries: “Haik and Stephan — over there.” Gabriel did not grasp 
what had happened. He knew Stephan was in danger. He 
rushed off hke a madman, where Hagop pointed. A hundred 
men caught up their rifles and followed their chief. 1l3ie 
“Lion,” Chaush Nurhan, was naturally one of them. But 
when, arrived at the emplacement, Bagradian saw the dead, 
and Stephan unharmed, he jerked his son so roughly to him 
that he might have been intending to shoot him too. All the 
rest were dazed. No one so much as noticed the two young 
heroes, those capturers of guns who, with such huge, new 
bronze toys to amuse them, had forgotten all the reahty 
around, how litdc time they had to wast^ and even the welter- 
ing death under their feet. For an instant the Armenian men 
stood breathless. This incredible thing was too huge to grasp, 
this booty too absurdly unattainable, for any among them to 
find time to ask how the fight had come about Quick— get 

387 



hold of the guns before the Turks cornel Two hundred arms 
got to work on it. The teams, the limbers, the munition box 
Were rushed up the slope, the howitzers slung to the lunbers. 
Every man of them pushed or tugged at the ropes, or put his 
shoulder to the wheds. The guns went jolting on, up the fis- 
sured, pathless earth of the mountain. But mght melted jutting 
rocks and bushes, the hard resistance of every obstacle, into 
soft flexibility. For a while it seemed as though the howitzers, 
borne on this mad strength of gripping hands, were hovering 
along above the earth. 

It was not two hours before the guns, in spite of the in- 
credibly difficult terrain, had been set up where Gabriel 
wanted them. He had been given a short account of Stephan’s 
deed. But the fear still thudding in his heart would not let 
him speak of it. He could not praise his son. This scatter- 
brained daring, the escapade of a half-grown schoolboy, was, 
he felt, a dangerous example not only to the other boys, but 
to the decads as well. If everyone now began to want to be 
heroic, that would be the end, on the Damlayik, of the only 
power — unified discipline — which might, at least for a tim^ 
guarantee the survival of the camp. Deeper still was his 
anxiety for Stephan. So far his luck had been incredible. Really 
the boy must be off his head! And you couldn’t lock him up, 
on Three-Tent Square. . . . But Gabriel did not follow out 
these thoughts, since now his whole mind was set on the 
howitzers. Their type was familiar to him; the battery he had 
served in the Balkan war had had guns of the same calibre. 
They were Austro-Hungarian lo cm. howitzers, of the 1899 
pattern, delivered to Turkey by the Skoda factory. The lockers 
in the gun-cart of the second still contained thirty shells. 
Gabrid found all he needed, and tried to remember exactly 
how to use it— the aiming-apparatus for finng from belli n A 
cover, a box of firing-instrucuons, and schedule, in the trail- 
box. He began to remember all he had learned, reckoned out 
the distance to Bitias, strove to get the exact position of the 

388 



Turkish encampment, screwed at the rear-sights to determine 
the given field of direction, took stock of the elevation of his 
enplacement, raised the barrels, with the little wheel, to centre 
the bubble, and only then pulled out the breech, set the fuses 
of two shells with the key-rmg, shoved the round projectiles 
into the bore, and pressed m the cartridges after them. His 
unpractised hand took very long to do dl this, and Chaush 
Nurhan could do next to nothing to help him. As the sun 
came up, Bagradian, having retested all these aiming factors, 
knelt with Nurhan, as regulations directed, one on either side 
of the gun-carriage, watch in hand. Two short, terrific cracks, 
bang upon bang, rent the air to shreds. The gun kicked, em- 
bedding Itself deep in the ground. These shells had been 
badly aimed; they dropped far wide of Bagradian’s target, 
somewhere in the valley. But this mere gesture was enough to 
apprise the whole Mohammedan countryside of the new vic- 
tory of the Christians, the loss of Turkish artillery, the im- 
pregnability of the Damlayik, and the fact, now public prop- 
erty, that the Armenian swine had entered into a compaa with 
the jinn, known of old as the evil spirits of Musa Dagh. The 
Chettehs had all vanished in the night, and a section of sap- 
tiehs, not attached to this nahiyeh, along with them. Now the 
few survivors of the companies were convinced that eves a 
full division would be routed, if k assailed this devil’s moun- 
tain. The bimbashi could not have ordered a fresh attack 
without risking a mutiny from his young troops. Nor did he 
even consider such foolhardiness, occupied with a far more 
modest problem : how to get the long line of carts, full of dead 
and wounded, back to Antioch, unperceived, as he had given 
strict orders they should be. The old man’s cheeks had no more 
.colour in them. It was all he could do to sit his horse, after 
two sleepless nights and the strain of battle. His fate was 
sealed. The bimbashi’s very limited powers of reflection, which, 
even in peaceable times, were far too desultory, could con- 
ceive no method of pulhng down to destruction along with 

389 



l»i«i the cursed Kaimakam and his set rascally, £azy civil 
sorvants who were really responsible for it all. 

The two thunderclaps, almost in thdr ears, seemed to those 
within the Town Enclosure hkc the menacing signs of divine 
assistance. The toughest, dourest among these peasants em- 
braced, with tears m their eyes. “Perhaps Christ really means 
to save us, after all.” Never before had their sunrise greetings 
sounded so heart-felt. As to the Bagradians, their kingly rank, 
doubly proved, seemed for ever established. Some of the peas- 
ants came to Gabriel, begging his permission to confer on 
Stephan the title "Elleon”— “Lion.” Gabriel rather sharply re- 
fused. His son was still only a child, without any real notion 
of danger. He didn’t want him to get conceited, or stuff his 
head with a lot of foolery, which might only end in disaster. 
So that Stephan, through his father’s severity, was balked of 
pubhc recognition, and had to content hunself with the flat- 
teries which, for a few days, surrounded him on all sides. In 
after-years those Armenian chroniclers who described the batde 
on the Damlayik wrote only of “the heroic action of a young 
sharpshooter” without naming him. But of what use would 
even the most exphcit praises have been then, to Bagradian’s 
son? 

Gabriel had long been a different man, and Stephan too had 
changed completely. The gently nurtured cannot do butcher’^ 
work unpunished, though right may be a thousand times on 
their side. On this boy’s delicate forehead some savage god 
of Musa Dagh was already setting his dark seal. 

This great night of August 14 witnessed yet another, though 
far less memorable, event. Sato had gone creeping down 
through the twilight, to her friends in the valley. Thi^ must, 
hear the whole tale of battle, learn how sixteen corpses lay 
covered on the bare earth, how the shrieks of the wounded 
rose and rose — ^loudest of all when the stupid hekim, Altouni, 
dabbled brown water on their wounds. Sato, that walking 

390 



newspaper, alike o£ mountain* and of grave-dwellers, could, 
tonight, revel in sensationalism, earning her soaal keep for 
days ahead. When Sato could satisfy her clients, and fed her- 
self a bdoved child, her eyes seemed to change into slits of 
flickering light, and her throaty jargon proclauned sensation 
with joyous zest. The churchyard folk rejoiced along with 
her— old Manushak, old Wartuk, and Nunik, the oldest of 
them all, or so she said. They wagged knowing heads. Deep 
sdf-importance possessed them. No longer superfluous out 
casts, they had an office to perform, incontestably theirs, 
through all human memory. The dead had need of them. 
Sixteen dead awaited them on the Damlayik. And, once they 
came about their business, their arch-enemy, Hekim Altouni, 
would have lost his power. No “enlightener” dared molest 
keening-women. 

So Nunik, Wartuk, Manushak, and a score of other beggar- 
women besides, set forth, with the slow, dignified tread of 
functionaries, for their dens, dug in the earth-mounds of the 
graveyard. They dragged forth the crammed and filthy sacks 
upon which they laid their beggar-women's heads. What it 
was that rotted in these sacks, in dense and permanent cor- 
ruption, passes description. The miscellaneous rubbish of fifty 
years’ picking up off the ground. The collector’s itch o£<all 
old, poor women in every land, the itch to save up moth-eaten 
remnants, scrape together mildewed garbage— this usual, jeal- 
ously guarded treasure-trove of rags and rottenness, had tiJten 
on the dimensions of a veritable orgy of stinking uselessness. 
Yet behold, these old women’s sacks seemed, besides their 
tatters, their cloth patches, empty boxes, stony crusts and 
cheese-rinds, to contain the professional equipment of Nunik, 
Wartuk, Manushak. Each of them plunged in her hand, to 
draw the same out of her luckybag— a long, grey veil, a pot of 
greasy salve. They squatted down, and began to smear their 
faces, like mimes. It was a dark purple facc.stain, which they 
worked into their deep<ut wrinkles, changing their incredibly 

381 



ancient faces into timeless and imponng masks. Nunik espe- 
cially, with the lupous nose and strong white teeth gleaming 
out of her dark, lipless visage, quite justified her romantic 
reputation as the “eternally wandering” medicine-woman. It 
took her a long time to make up. Suddenly they broke off their 
preparations and puffed out their stump of candle-end, the 
wick-flame, in the rancid oil cup set up before them. Hoofs 
and voices came scurrying past. This was the instant when the 
bimbashi and his staff rode away to Suedia. When the sounds 
had petered out in Habibli, the wood village, the women rose, 
enveloped their grey, matted heads in the veils, took each a 
long stick in her hand, and their broken, clappenng shoes set 
out. Their stringy, old women’s legs seemed to manage sur- 
prisingly long strides. Sato came after, scared at their majesty. 
As, plying their staves, they went on in silence under the 
moon, these kecning-women had almost the look of the 
masked leaders of a Greek chorus. 

What stored-up, inexhaustible vitality, what stout hearts, the 
Armenian women possessed! Not one, as they emerged from 
the steep ilex gully on to the burying-ground of the encamp- 
ment, breathed a jot more quickly. These purple-faced wallers 
had all the strength they needed to set to work. Nunik, War- 
tuk, Manushak, and the others crouched round the dead. Their 
dirty claws uncovered the already stiffened faces. And their 
song, older perhaps than the oldest song of all humanity, rose 
to the skies. Its text was no mure than the ever-repeated names 
of these fresh corpses. Names, keened over and over, without 
a break, till the last stars faded in greemsh ether. Poor though 
its text, the more richly varied was its melody. Sometimes it 
was a long groaning monotone, sometimes a chain of howling 
coloratura, sometimes the empty, drooping repetition, maimed 
with its grief, of the same two notes; sometimes it was a 
shrill, greedy demand — ^yet none of this in free obedience to 
an impulse, but strictly conventionahzed and handed down 
by a long tradition. Not all the singers had Nunik’s voice or 

39 * 



inherited technique. There were mediocre^ and so vain, artists 
among them, whose thoughts as they worked were occupied 
with fees and inheritance. What use were all his pounds and 
piastres to the richest man, up here^ Let him give lavish ofier- 
ings to the beggar-folk, and he would do not only a deed 
pleasing to God, but a useful worL The keenmg-women, the 
blind, the outcasts, were able to lay out chinking piastres, even 
in Mohammedan villages, without risk. So that Armenian 
money would not be wasted on them, but be of use to poor 
Armenian bodies, and the benefactors thus acquire celestial 
merit at bargain prices. Between the chants, her colleagues 
admonished Nunik, with all their might, to insist on this 
common-sense standpoint, and raise the usual fee for a corpse- 
watching. Through the grey hght came the relatives, bringing 
their long, fine-woven shrouds. These had been stored up by 
every family, and had to be taken with every house-moving. 
The shift in which a man stands up from the dead, his most 
festal garment, is a gift given by the members of each house- 
hold to one another, on the most solemn occasions in their 
hves. The task of weaving such a shroud is accounted a par- 
ticular honour. Only the worthiest women may perform it. 

These women’s howls had died into a low, almost soundless, 
windy sigh. It went with the corpse-washing, the enshroud- 
ing, like cold comfort. Then the long shifts were tied under 
the feet in double knots. This was to keep the limbs from dis- 
persal, so that the last storm, which shall drive all bones to- 
gether, to be judged, might not find it hard to fit the right 
ones. Towards midday the graves stood open, and all men 
ready for the burials. On sixteen biers, made of strong branches 
lashed together, the fallen were carried twice round the altar, 
while Ter Haigasun chanted his funeral dirge. Afterwards, on 
the burial-ground, he addressed the people: 

“These, our dear brethren, have been snatched away by 
bloody death. And yet we must devoudy thank the Blessed 
Trinity that they have died in battle, in freedom, and arc to 

393 



rest here in diis earth, among their own. Yes, we have sdfi 
the grace of a free death, of our own choosing. And, therefore, 
to see aright the grace in which God lets ua live, we must 
think again and again of the thousands from whom such grace 
had been withdrawn; of those who have died in the worst 
bondage, who lie out unburied on the plains, in ditches along 
the highroads, and are being devoured by vultures and hyenas. 
If we climb that knoll to our left, and look out eastwards, we 
shall see stretching away before us the endless fields of our 
dead, where there is no consecrated ground, no priest, no 
burial, and only the hope of the Last Judgment. So let us 
then, in this hour in which we lower these happy ones into 
earth, remember what real misfortune is, and that it is not 
here, but out yonder.” 

This short sermon drew deep groans from the villagers en- 
camped on Musa Dagh, who had all assembled. Ter Haigasun 
went to the tubs which contained their consecrated earth. 
Sixteen times he put in his hand, to open it over the head of 
a dead fighter. It moved with the slowest deliberation. They 
(Xiuld see how sparing he was of that precious soil. 


394 



3 


The Procession of Fire 

Nunik, Waituk, Manushak— today they were in luck profes- 
sionaUy. Before they so much as found time to wipe their 
faces dean with lettuce leaves, another engagement presented 
itself. It was one of an exactly opposite kind. If the woman’s 
labour was prolonged, as they had every reason to hope it 
naight be, they could count on three full meals at least. And, 
in the very just supposition that any human event may occur 
at any time in a population of five thousand, they had brought 
all the essentials of their craft, wrapped in the crumpled folds 
of their garments — sevsamith, the black fennel seed, a little 
swallow dung, the tad hair of a chestnut horse, and other sim- 
ilar medicaments. 

Even before the earth of the Damlayik had closed over the 
last of the dead, Hovsannah’s labour had begun. Only Iskohi 
was with her in the tent, everyone dse had gone to the burial. 
Iskuhi’s lame arm prevented her being of much use to her 
sister'in-law. There was no seat with a back to it against which 
the labouring mother could bear down. Cushions gave her no 
leverage, and the bed had only a low iron frame. Iskuhi sat 
with her back to Hovsannah, so that the tortured woman 
might press firmly against her body. But Iskuhi was too frail 
to hold out against Hovsannah’s heavy thrusts; chng as fast as 
she might to the bed-frame, she always slipped. Hovsannah 
let out a short scream. It came as a signal to Nunik. That 
wailer’s alert instinct had drawn her away from the buriaL 

395 



These mourners’ work was done, then surprisingly high feet 
had been clawed together. 

Iskubi was about to leave the tent in search of Mairik 
Antaram when the three fates, unbidden, thrust into the tent. 
Their rigid purple faces shone in the gloom. The two Tomas- 
ian women were speechless; not that die mourners themselves 
alarmed them— who did not know them in Yoghonoluk? — 
but at the sight of their funeral trappings, which they still 
wore. Numk, who divined at once the superstitious reason of 
these fears, calmed them: “Little daughter, it's good we should 
come like this. It keeps death behind us.” 

Numk began her obstetric treatment by drawing the sis out 
of her garments, the thin iron poker to stir up the tonir fire. 
She began tracing out big crosses along the inner wall of the 
tent. 

“Why arc you drawing crosses?” asked Iskuhi, spellbound. 

Numk explained' as she worked. All the powers of the air 
assemble round the beds of labouring women, the evil more 
numerous than the good. When the child pushes into the 
world, in the very instant when his head pushes into life, these 
evil spirits hurl themselves upon it, to possess and permeate. 
Every human born must, of necessity, take something of them. 
It is because of this that madness hes asleep at the bottom of 
all our hearts. So that the devil has his share of all men, and 
only Christ Saviour was never devil-ridden. In Numk’s view 
the highest art of the midwife lies in her knowledge of how 
to cut down the devil’s share. These crosses served as prohibit- 
ing signals, as mystic quarantine. Iskuhi remembered her 
dream of the convoy, night after night. The face of kaleido- 
scopic evil, Satan and all his works, still hovered above her. 
And she, too, with her free hand, had tried to ban him by 
traang a great cross in the air. Oh, for how much earthly 
terror must Christ Saviour at every instant not be in readi- 
ness! This was by no means the end of Nunik’s wisdom. She 
explained to the startled women how all our entrails— the 

396 



lungs, the hvcr, the heart especially — arc in sympathy with a 
different devil, who will strive to get entire possession of them 
all. The whole act of birth is no more than a wresthng-match 
of good and evil, for the full ownership of the child. So that 
a wise mother would use the old, well-tried feints and aid 
which Nunik gave her. If she did, her child was certain to get 
past its first, dangerous days. 

When sudden panic had abated, the presence of these three 
bedizened midwives was remarkably soothing — ^lulling — in its 
effect. Hovsannah even dozed, and seemed not to notice how 
Wartuk tied up her wrists and ankles with thin, silk cords. 
But Nunik came close to the bed, and counselled her: “The 
longer your body remains closed, the longer your strength re- 
mains shut in. The later you open your body, the more 
strength will enter, and issue out of you.” 

Meanwhile the little, sturdy Manushak had lighted a twig 
fire in front of the tent. Two smooth stones, hke flat loaves, 
were put to heat in it. This was a far less occult remedy, since 
these warm stones, wrapped into cloths, would serve to warm 
the exhausted body of the mother. Even Bedros Hekim might 
have approved of this more practical part of magic obstetrics, 
and of the fennel-water, which Manushak heated over her 
fire. None the less his remaining bans brisded with rage when 
he found his three arch-enemies vdth the patient. He swung 
his stick and, with all the nimblcness of youth, drove off the 
keeners. His sharp little voice pursued them with insults. 
“Carnon-crows” was perhaps the mildest. 

We see, therefore, that Dr. Bedros Altouni was a very ardent 
champion indeed of western science. Had not old Avetis Ba- 
gradian sent him to get his education and supported him a 
whole five years at the University of Vienna, that he might 
hold aloft the torch of enhghtenment above the darkness of 
this people? But how were things with hipa in reality? What 
reward had fate given the hekim for having kept his promise 



to his old patron? In all the long years through whidi* astride 
his patient ass, the doctor had gone jogging round the villages, 
and indeed been in constant request by Moslems, up and down 
the whole district, he had had to admit the oddest experiences. 
His whole scientific heart might rebel, but his eyes had had to 
see many cures obtained by the lousiest quacks, the filthiest 
nostrums, in fiat defiance of all antiseptic or hygiene. In eighty 
percent of these cures “evil eye” had been the diagnosis. For 
this the specifics were spittle, sheep’s piss, burnt horsehair, 
birds’ dung, and even more attractive medicaments. And yet, 
more than once it had happened that a patient, given up by 
Dr. Altouni, got a lightning cure from having swallowed a 
strip of paper scribbled with a verse from Bible or Koran. 
Altouni was not the man to credit the magic of swallowed 
strips, not, at least, to the point where doubts assailed him. But 
what use was scepticism? A cure was a cure! In Armenian 
villages the news of such miraculous therapy would get about 
from time to time, so that Altouni’s patients all forsook him, 
to seek out the Arab hekim in the naghbourhood, or even con- 
sult Nunik and her worthy sisters, the other fates. And fre- 
quently there would be confirmed “enlighteners” — ^this or that 
sdiooltcacher, for instance — who deserted the doctor for the 
quack. It certainly did not improve his temper. 

There was another reason for Dr. Altouni’s bitter wrath. 
Perhaps it was the really valid one. Science! Enlightenment! 
Progress! All well and good. But to diffuse the light of sci- 
entific advancement one must oneself be scientifically ad- 
vanced. And who, cut off from all knowledge of recent dis- 
coveries, medical books, or medical journals, could advance in 
the shadow of Musa Dagh? Krikor’s library contained the 
works of many years on every conceivable subject except medi- 
cine, although, or perhaps b^use, he was a chemist. Bedros 
Altouni had only a German Handbook of Medicine published 
in 1875. It was a solid work; it contained the essendals. But 
it had one grave defect. For devouring time had not only 

398 



a£Cected the vade mecum, but also the doctor’s memory of 
G^rnan. The Handbook had, as it were, been struck dumb. 
So now Dr. Altouni never opened it, nor even used it as 
amulet and fetish. All that, decades ago, he had learned the- 
oretically, had melted into an inconsiderable something. For 
the doctor there were ten to twenty diseases that could be 
named. Though he had seen innumerable pictures of human 
suffering, he crammed them all under the few headings he pos- 
sessed. In the depths of his sad and simple heart Altouni felt 
every bit as ignorant as the hekims, quacks, and keening- 
wives of the district, whose gruesome cures so damnably often 
succeeded, with a htde help from patient Nature. It was just 
this utter lack of conceit which, without his ever being aware 
of it, made of Altouni a great doctor. On the other hand it 
provoked these frenzied outbursts at the sight of Nunik, 
Wartuk, Manushak. But today these midwives did not let 
themselves be dismissed. They lingered on the edge of Three- 
Tent Square, eyemg the enemy with derinon. 

Hovsannah, the pastor’s wife, was the first woman among 
the people to lie in childbed on the Damlayik. Even in the 
everyday valley a birth was a kind of public event, to which 
all assembled, near and distant relatives, not excepting the 
men. How much more solemn, therefore, and public an occa- 
sion, up here in camp — since now, in perhaps the most perilous 
situation in which that people had yet b^n placed, the first 
Armeman child was to be brought forth. Even the resplendent 
spoils of war, the two golden howitzers, shed their glory on it. 
The crowds which had that morning surrounded those tro- 
phies now jammed into Three-Tent Square, the most “select” 
place in this poor camp. The curtains of poor Hovsannah’s 
tent were lifted and she was mercilessly exposed to the sun. 
Her birthpangs were her own, but she was the people’s. The 
inquisitive came in and out. Altouni, having soon realized 
himself superfluous, had made way, with a. grunt, for his wife, 
who as a rule replaced him at a child-bed. He walked away, 

399 



taking no notice of the deep salaams of the keening-women, 
towards the hospital-hut to visit his wounded. 

Mairik Antaram stayed with Hovsannah. With sharp words, 
even with fists, she cleared the tent of its intruders. Etecisivcly 
she set about the duties which for many decades she had per- 
formed. Yet, old as Mairik was, she could still, even today, 
not help at a childbirth without some thoughts of the two 
miscarriages which dated back to her earhest youth. Iskuhi 
stroked her sister's forehead with hands as cool as ice, in spite 
of the heat She kept eyeing Mairik with shy anxiety, afraid of 
missing some direction. All the energy of the doctor’s wife 
could not keep people out of the hut; they kept on rcturmng, 
to give advice, encourage, ask how things were getting on. 
Gabriel too came in for news. Iskuhi, in the midst of all this 
bustle, was sail struck by the haggard paleness of his bearded 
face. Also she felt surprised that Juliette should remain scarcely 
half an hour with Hovsannah — ^they had lived together so 
long, in a single family. Aram, the husband, was m and out 
every twenty minutes. But he always went again. He was, he 
kept saying, more needed than ever; after yesterday’s victory 
over the Turks he must keep an eye on the general discipline. 
Really his own excitement, and worry about his wife, drove 
him round in circles. 

The women of the people were shaking their heads over the. 
fact that Hovsannah Tomasian did not scream as she lay in 
labour. They sensed some pride behind it It was perhaps the 
pride of shame. Nunik, Wartuk, Manushak, had long since 
come back into the foreground. Nunik herseljf squatted insiHc 
the tent, watching all Antaram’s laborious efforts with re- 
flectively professional eyes, much as a world-famous surgeon 
might watch the work of a village barber 

After more than eight hours’ labour pains Hovsannah at last 
brought 'forth a son. This child, who in its mother’s womb 
since Zeitun, had known much fear and suffering, was uncon- 
scious, and did not breathe. Antaram shook the any body, still 

400 



covered with blood and afterbirth, while Iskuhi had to breathe 
into its mouth. But Nunik and her colleagues, who knew 
better, seized like lightning on the afterbirth, to pierce it with 
seven needles, owned by seven different families. They cast 
the whole into their fire. The life which, to escape its fate on 
earth, had taken refuge in this dead matter, must be freed by 
fire. A few seconds later the child gurgled; he began to breathe, 
and then to whimper. Mairik Antaram rubbed him all over 
carefully with mutton fat. The crowd, grown silent, began ap- 
plauding. The sun sank. Pastor Aram, with all the clumsy, 
rather absurd, pride of a young father, took up the little 
wrinkled thing, which should grow to a man, and held it out 
to the people. They all rejoiced and praised Tomasian, since 
this was a male. The broadest jokes went the rounds of the 
fighters. None of them could remember the real future. It re- 
mains uncertain which of them was the first to notice the 
little, round fiery birth-spot which this true son of Musa Dagh 
bore above his tiny heart. The women put their heads together 
to consult as to the meaning of this sign. But Nunik, Wartuk, 
Manushak, whose profession it was to decipher such omens, 
would say nothing, bound up their veils, took their staves, and 
so retraced their steps, well recompensed. Their old brown 
legs moved in long strides. Again they were like the mim^ 
of an ancient chorus as, under the rising moon, they took 
their way down mountain slopes towards the graves of the 
past. 

Not more than three days and nights had passed, and scouts 
were already announcing incomprehensible movements in the 
villages. Gabriel climbed at once to his observation post. His 
field-glass certainly showed a most active scurry, in sharply 
differentiated forms. Long lines of ox-carts across the plain 
of the Oroiites, along the highroad between the villages, on 
the paths and cart-tracks leading off it. Big crowds in these 
villages themselves, people m fez and turban, darting in and 

401 



out, in obvious baste. Gabrid tested every strip of ground trddi 
bis spy-glass, but could not make out one soldier’s uniform, 
and not many saptiehs. On the other hand he noticed that this 
time it was not the familiar populace of Antakiya, or its sub- 
urbs, that invaded the empty streets. Today’s incursions looked 
far more opulent, and seemed to have a definite object. Great 
stir on the church square of Yoghonoluk. Little turbaned 
shapes were clambering up the fire-escape of the church, and 
moving about in the empty bell-tower, to the side of the big 
cupola. The long-drawn, thread-like notes of a tiny voice 
grew audible, perceptible rather, sent out to the four quarters 
of the globe. It was the prayer-crycr of the Prophet, standing 
above the house of Christ, giving out of himself his plangent 
sing-song, which causes every Moslem heart to beat faster, 
and which seemed to be bringing in the faithful from every 
cluster of huts, village, market town, in the empty land. The 
fate of the Church of Ever-Increasing Angelic Powers, built 
by Avetis the elder, was therefore sealed. The mad desire to 
answer this desecration with a shell flashed into the grand- 
son’s mind. He checked his impulse. His basic principle — 
always to defend, never attack— must be broken least of all by 
himself. And the mountain, towering secretively over its ene- 
mies, as though shamming dead, threatened more effectively. 
Provocation could only weaken their defence, since it gave 
the Turks, the ruling people, their moral right to punish rebels. ' 

As he watched all this mysterious stir in the valley, Bagrad- 
ian asked himself how many more onslaughts tliey could 
drive back. In spite of the spoils of double victory, and Nur- 
han’s workshop for making cartridges, the munition supply 
was very limited. It made his heart stand still to remember liow 
the smallest shp, the most trifling failure, must lead to irre- 
trievable disaster. There was no middle way for those on the 
Damlayik; it was cither final victory, or the end. His tartiral 
skill was merely useful to put off that end as long as he could. 
To acbeve that object the capital sum of wholesome fear 

403 



which, after two defeats, they obviously inspired in the Turks, 
must not be frittered away. The new population of the valley 
increased every minute. But this time it did not mean an at- 
tack, of that he was certain, after long and nunute investiga- 
tion. Perhaps they were only holding a demonstration, perhaps 
this was the solemn investiture of a Christian district by Islam. 
In front of the church door of Yoghonoluk he made out a 
small group of men in European dress. The miidir with his 
officials, presumed Bagradian, glad to see no officer among 
them, come to get the hang of the situauon. All the same he 
ordered that the trenches were to keep on the sharpest alert, 
set a double guard at every observation post, and groups of 
scouts at all possible approaches to the Damlayik, as far down 
as the vines and orchards, so that no surprise attack at night 
should be possible. 

Gabriel had judged correctly. It was the freckled mudir 
who stood in the church square of Yoghonoluk. But a greater 
than he, the dyspeptic Kaimakam m person, had come to have 
a look round for himself. There was excellent reason for it. 
This last, disastrous defeat of a force of regulars had made 
things happen in Antioch— things which entailed important 
consequences. 

Between the Kaimakam and the poor, rosy<hecked bim- 
bashi a life-or-death struggle had started instandy. That forth- 
right veteran of the simple barrack squares of former days 
was in no way up to the latest Ittihad finesse. Only now did 
he begin to get some inkling why his deputy, and keen com- 
petitor, the yus-bashi, had chosen this moment to go on leave. 
By granting it he had walked into the trap. Very soon now the 
major would have ceased to deputize. It began by the Kai- 
makam’s slyly contriving to stir up popular hatred against the 
bimbashi. In Antioch there was only one hospital, superin- 
tended by the civil authorities. Soldiers without much the 
matter with them were ill in barracks, but if hra^ital treat- 

403 



ment became necessary the military command had to put in a 
request to the Kaimakam. The Kaimakam made skilful use 
of his red tape. But, in any case, he had finished the colonel. 
Yet the thing might have gone dragging on for weeks, with 
piles of reports and investigations, before they removed him 
from his command; and, to pursue his policy in the kazah, 
the Kaimakam needed dependable Ittihad collaborators, not 
indolent dug-outs, survivals of the days of Abdul Hamid, He 
and the major had judged the event with suflfident accuracy, 
and made their arrangements together. A few hours before 
the bimbashi got back to Antioch, the disconsolate herald of 
his own downfall, a long line ef ox-carts with dead and 
wounded, the victims both of guns and avalanche, had come 
into the town, at the dead of night. No light shone in the 
windows of the Hukumet. When these carts halted outside 
the hospital, its superintendent categorically refused to admit 
their occupants. He had been expressly forbidden to take in 
soldiers without written permission from the Kaimakam. 
Cunses and threats left him unmoved. The surgeon, by the 
light of an oil lamp, and of the moon, in the open air, put 
on the most necessary bandages. He, too, had neither space 
nor permission to admit two hundred extra patients into his 
wretched lazaret. In despair he sent off an assistant to the 
Kaimakam, to get his instructions. It took a very long time 
for the messenger to come back without any. The Kaimakam 
was so soundly asleep that nobody had succeeded in waking 
him. So that at last it had to be decided to take these scream- 
ing, or groaning, men to barracks, where at least they could 
have a roof over their heads. Meanwhile the sun was up, it 
was full daylight. An indescribable impression was made on 
the people of Antioch by these carts, slippery with blood. And 
when, at almost the same instant, the poor bimbashi, so tried 
by fate, rode with his staff across the Orontes bridge into the 
town, he was welcomed with stones, and could scarcely get 
back to his quarters, by devious lanes. Only now, with crowds 

404 



thronging the market-place, did the Kaimakam, whose sleep 
was so deliciously long and tranquil, send necessary permis- 
sion to the hospital. The long line of cart-loads of wretched 
men Jolted slowly back there. The carts had been given care- 
ful orders to trundle through the Long Bazaar. This repeated 
sight of sallow, agonized faces, bandages stiff with blood, pro- 
voked an uproar. A furious crowd collected in front of the 
barracks, and broke all the poor bimbashi’s windows — and 
windows, in these parts, were valuable luxuries. Not only that! 
What was left of the military arm had grown so timid, so sub- 
dued, so scared of the mob, that it closed its barrack-gates, like 
any terrified little shopkeeper. In every collection of massed 
humanity there slumbers a primitive hatred, easily roused, 
against its rulers. As it heard the deathly quiet behind 
barrack-gates, this mob grew aware that it had triumphed, and 
opened fresh fire. His officers kept imploring the bimbashi to 
let them turn out the guard with fixed bayonets, to clear the 
square. But the old man, stretched on his sofa, could heed no 
counsel. He could only whimper: “It isn’t my fault,” again 
and again. Utterly worn out by this strain and hardship, he 
sobbed except when he fell asleep, and slept whenever he was 
not sobbing The garrison had to endure the further disgrace 
of requesting pohee and saptiehs to rid the square of its turbu- 
lent populace. 

All this delighted the Kaimakam. He, with the manicured 
mudir from Salonika, had meanwhile repaired to the local 
telegraph office. This time these gentlemen between them com- 
posed a masterpiece of political acumen and tactful insight. 
A dispatch to His Excellency the Wah of Aleppo. This 
voluminous telegraphed document contained eleven hundred 
words, and covered ten closely written forms. A document as 
involved and subtle as the deed drawn up by a needy but am- 
bitious solicitor, as glib as the most liberal newspaper editorial. 
It began, with colourful emphasis, by describing the recent 
disastrous efforts to “liquidate”— these heavy, yet so unneces- 

405 



sary, losses (with figures attached): stigmatized as the un- 
heard-of military delinquency that indeed it was, this stnr- 
Fcnder of insufficiently guarded howitzers to a set of rascally 
mutineers. The Kaimakam then dismissed the unhappy busi- 
ness with a resigned suggestion that any attempt on his part 
to influence military decisions was almost bound to be misin- 
terpreted. On the other hand he felt it very urgent to insist 
on the highly uncertain state of public feeling in this matter, so 
outraged, for the moment at least, as to demand, even by street 
demonstrations, the instant removal from his command of the 
present bimbashi. And he, the Kaimakam, had not a suffi- 
ciently strong force of militia and saptiehs at his disposal to 
control any really serious outbreak. Therefore the popular out- 
cry would have to he conceded to without delay, and would 
His Excellency be so kind as to remove and punish by court 
martial the present responsible commandant? All this, the 
Kaimakam continued, was merely the indirect result of dual 
control, smee the Syrian vilayets were subject both to their 
civil governors and the High Command of the Fourth Army. 
For so long as such dual control continued, he could guarantee 
neither peace in the kazah nor the so desirable compleuon of _ 
the enforcement of the edict of deportation against Armenians. 
He gave lucid legal demonstration that measures to ensure 
the migration of the Armenian millet were a process of the 
avil arm, in which even the most highly placed officers had 
no warrant to act independently. In their case mihtary com- 
petence was fully comprised in the concept “auxiliary.” But 
the use of such auxihary troops depended, by the text of the 
edict, solely on such decisions as the avil authoriaes might 
arrive at. The present prevailing practice was therefore illegal, 
since the High Command frequendy acted at its own discre- 
tion, in many cases withheld its auxiliary forces, acted in a 
manner hostile to district governors, and would even some- 
times commandeer the gendarmerie— a section of the civil arm 
—for its own objects. Such dangerous practices had resulted 

anfi 



in stirring up the Armenian population to a resistance which, 
i£ it spread, might entail unpredictable consequences to the 
whole empire. The Kaimakam closed this very unusual service 
telegram on an almost threatemng note. He could only under- 
take the hquidation of the armed camp on Musa Dagh on 
condition that he were given full control of all effectives. For 
that purpose he must have military auxiliaries, so armed and 
of such strength, at his disposal as to make possible the com- 
plete and thorough clearance of the whole mountain. Nor 
could It be a question of undertaking such punitive action with 
an officer unversed in the particular circumstances. He begged 
most urgently that the present deputy-major might be pro- 
moted military commandant of Antakiya, since this Arme 
man undertaking ought to be left entirely in his control. Other- 
wise — should these minimum requests not be considered pos- 
sible of fulfilment — he, the Kaimakam, ventured most respect- 
fully to suggest that the disaster above described had better 
be accepted as a fdt accompli, without any further counter- 
measures, and the rebels left to their own devices on Musa 
Dagh. 

The Kaimakam’s report was a masterpiece of pohtical in- 
sight. Should he obtam only a portion of his requests, he would 
be the most independent district governor in Syria. A well- 
trained offiaal heart of the last generation would no doubt 
have fluttered in apprehension at the rather challenging tone 
of this huge dispatch. Not so the Young Turk. Such blunt de- 
cisiveness was attuned to the ears of the present authorities. 
They were on their knees before the progressive West, and so, 
m superstitious awe of such words as '‘iniuative” and “energy,” 
even though the voice that spoke them was somewhat harsh. 

Simultaneously the ruined bimbashi, whose rosy cheeks had 
certainly faded out for ever, was scrawling a long dispatch to 
the base commandant, his immediate superior. It was verbose, 
full of prolix accusations against the Kaintakam, who had 
forced hun to this disastrous undertaking, without having al* 

407 



lowed him any time to make the necessary preparations. The 
bimbashi’s tone was doleful, subdued, ceremonious, and conse- 
quently as wrong as it could be. The broken old man was re- 
moved within twenty-four hours and summoned to attend a 
court martial. He vanished through the night into obscurity, 
from the scene of many years’ comfortable activity, the most 
innocent victim of Armenian success in war. 

But His Excellency the Wall of Aleppo was so impressed 
with the suggestions of the Kaimakam of Antioch that he had 
them telegraphed on to Istanbul, with a strong personal recom- 
mendation, to the Ministry of the Interior. This subordinate 
had touched, with his finger-ups, a very sore spot in his su- 
perior. Ever since the great Jemal Pasha, with the unrestricted 
powers of a Roman proconsul, had been commanding in Syria, 
all walls and mutessarifs had shrunk to the stature of imnor 
deities. Jemal Pasha treated these mighty ones as so many 
commissariat officials attached to his army. They were given 
curt orders to deliver at such and such a point so and so many 
thousand oka of grain, or, in a given time, to put this or that 
highroad in faultless repair. This general seemed to regard the 
whole civil population as an onerous set of unnecessary para- 
sites, and civil government as a quite unnecessary evil. His 
Excellency of Aleppo was therefore delighted with the chance 
to rap this iron pasha over the knuckles, and apprise the Istan- 
bul authorities of the wretched failure of arrogant fire-eaters. 

Talaat Bey, however, read the Kaimakam’s masterpiece with 
mixed feelings. It was his ]ob to protect the civil arm against 
encroachments by the military. And to him these Armenian 
deportations were a matter of far greater urgency than the 
boring ambitions of discontented officers. He stroked his white 
pique waistcoat with his great paws, several times, as his habit 
was. At last the nimble fingers of the telegraphist, attached to 
these mighty paws, clipped the sheets together, scribbled, and 
attached the slip: “Urgently request immediate settlement.” 

The dossier wandered without delay on to the desk of the 

408 



Minister of War. It was Enver Pasha’s habit never to refuse 
a request of Talaat’s. That evening, when they came together 
at the Endjumen, the smaller cabinet meeting, Enver came 
straight to his friend. The young war-god smiled demurely, 
and blinked long lashes. “I’ve sent Jemal an urgent wire about 
Musa Dagh. . . .’’ And without awaiting Talaat’s thanks, with 
a daintilymischicvous moue: ‘I’m sure you ought all of you to 
thank me for having sent that mad creature to Syria — ^well 
out of mischiefl” 

There was an Arab hotel before the Jaffa Gate in Jerusalem. 
Its windows looked out over the David citadel, with the tower- 
ing minaret. In this hotel General Jemal Pasha, the general 
in command of this particular army, had set up his temporary 
headquarters Here he read the dispatches from Enver, the 
Wall of Aleppo, and other functionaries, imploring him to 
provide for the instant quelling of this wretched Armenian 
revolt. (In those days it was the habit of all Young Turkish 
potentates to wire volumes to one another. It was more than a 
matter of mere urgency. It sprang from a barbaric joy in the 
use of talking electricity.) Jemal Pasha sat alone in the room. 
Neither Ah Fuad Bey nor the German, von Frankenstein, his 
two chiefs of staff, was with him. Only Osman, the head of 
the bodyguard, stood at the door, a valiant and romantic 
mountaineer, who gave the effect of a uniformed dummy in a 
war museum. Jemal’s bodyguard served two objects. Their 
barbaric splendour was a concession to Asiatic love of display, 
which could not otherwise be indulged, in the mechanized drab 
of modern warfare. At the same time they served to allay a 
fear — one which all through the ages has distmguished ic- 
tators from their less succe.ssful fellow-men — of assassination. 
Osman had orders never to leave the general alone, especially 
not with any caller from Istanbul. For Jemal by no means felt 
it to be impossible that his brethren, Enver or Talaat, might 
send him some highly recommended expert— in the art of 

409 



death. The general scanned the dispatches, especially Enver’s, 
with close attention. Though really this seemed a trifling 
matter, it turned his sallow face sallower still; the lips, pouting 
out through the black beard, turned white with rage. The gen- 
eral sprang to his feet, began pacing up and down. He was as 
short as Enver, but stockily, not daintily, built. He hunched 
his left shoulder a little, so that people who did not know him 
well thought "him deformed. Heavy red hands hung down 
limp, out of the gold-striped sleeves of his general’s tunic. The 
mere sight of them was enough to explain the rumour that 
this was the grandson of a former Istanbul executioner Enver 
was composed of the lightest substance, Jemal of the hea\ lest. 
If the one was all dreamy caprice, the other was all and, pas- 
sionate brooding. Jemal loathed the silken favourite of the 
gods, with all the detestation of physical underlings. He had 
had to sweat for everything which dropped into Enver’s lap- 
martial celebrity, luck, women’s favour, Jemal ttxik up the 
dispatch again, and tried, through its official impersonality, to 
get the tones of Enver’s coquettish voice. Throughout these 
minutes the fate of the seven communes on Musa Dagh was 
more in the balance than ever previously. A chit from Jemal 
would have sufficed to send two full battahons of infantry, 
machine-guns, a mountain battery, agamst the Damlayik. That 
would have settled matters in an hour, in spite of all Bagrad- 
ian’s valour. As Jemal read the dispatch a second time, his 
anger seemed to simmer up to boiling-point. He snapped at 
the disconcerted Osman to get out, and, on pain of death, not 
disturb him again. Then he went across to the window, but 
drew back at once, fearful of showing the world his naked 
soul. Oh, if he could only dispose of Enverl That society 
beauty of the war I That inflated little drawing-rcxim pet! 
That climber, who never in all his hfe had done one really 
masculine act, who’d wangled his reputation as a general by 
retaking Adrianople with his cavalry — sidhng into it, when 
the whole business was really setded. And a Jemal had to play 

410 



second fiddle to this vain, insignificant playboy of the Otto- 
man empirel That cunning sissy dared attempt to rid himself 
of a Jemal, by fobbing him oS with the Syrian command — 
Jemal’s rage against the Mars of Istanbul deepened by several 
fathoms of the souL An absurd trifle had released it. Enver’s 
telegram began with the words: “I beg you to take immediate 
measurei.” No thought of addressing him as “Your Excel- 
lency," not even with the simplest “Pasha”! And Jemal was 
a stickler for forms, especially when in contact with an Enver. 
He would use the most pedantic ceremony, even in their inti- 
mate conversations. Feverishly touchy, he watched lest Enver 
should fail in due respect or abate one jot of his martial dig- 
nities. This wire, with its insolent beginning, was the last 
drop in Jemal’s cup of hate, which was running over. Enver, 
for several months, had made monstrous demands on the gen- 
eral, who had always complied without a word. First Jemal 
had been commanded to send back his thud and tenth divi- 
sions to Istanbul, later even his twenty-fifth, and finally the 
whole Thirteenth Army Corps, which had been moved to 
Baghdad and Bitlis. At the moment the dictator of Syria com- 
manded no more than sixteen to eighteen shabby battalions, 
and this in a huge war area extending from the heights of 
the Taurus to the Suez canal. All that was Enver Pasha’s 
work— the war situation was merely a pretext. Of that the 
rabid Jemal was persuaded. The general-in-chief, with his 
usual pickpocket methods, had disarmed him, drawn his 
teeth, at the same time depriving him of any possibility of 
a victory. A hundred scurvy, treacherous details, seen with the 
full lucidity of hate, stood out in Jemal Pasha’s mind, all so 
many further proofs of the low-down way in which Enver 
had always treated him. He and his clique had constandy 
kept Jemal at arm’s length, failed to inform him of their most 
important resoludons, to invite him to intimate sitdngs. This 
reladonship, from the very first, had been a train of carefully 
thought-out snubs and— worst, most disgraceful of all— Jemal 

411 



could not assert himself against Enver! The fellow’s very pres- 
ence and personality made him feel irretrievably second-rat^ 
although he knew himself far superior, both as a leader and 
a general. Jemal Pasha, hunching his left shoulder, still wan- 
dered round and round the table. He felt quite powerless. 
Crazy juvenile schemes flashed into his mind: Move on Istan- 
bul with a new army, take prisoner this insolent puppy, open 
the Bosporus to the Allies, make peace with the present enemy. 
For the third time he took up the dispatches, but at once 
slammed them down on the table again. What would be the 
most poisonous mischief he could do to Enver and his clique? 
Jemal knew that in the Armenian deportations they saw their 
most sacred patriotic mission. He himself had often referred 
to them as that. But he would never have endorsed that typ- 
ical piece of Enver amateurishness which made of Syria the 
cloaca for Armenian corpses. The Mmister of War had been 
careful not to ask him to sittings in which the deportation law 
was discussed. If he had, not a shred would have been left of 
darling httlc Enver’s pretty schemes. Another reason in that, 
why the soapy swindler had moved him south-east, out of the 
way. Now, in his wild itch for revenge, he wondered whether 
to bar the eastern frontier, drive the convoys back to Antioch, 
and so bring to nothing the whole great work. 

As he was thinking this, his German chief-of-staff, Colonel 
von Frankenstein, knocked at tlie door. Jemal at once put to 
flight the larva of his heated imagination. He was again the 
steadily reflective, almost scrupulous general known to his 
entourage. Pouting Asiatic lips retreated into the meshes of 
the black beard. He was always particularly careful to give 
this German general the impression of grumpy, very objective 
logic. Von Frankenstein met the most stonily casual of Jemal’s 
commanding ofiicer’s stares. They sat down to the table. The 
German opened his portfolio, drew out notes, and began a 
report on the disposiuon of fresh troops in Syria. He noticed 

4S2 



the heap of dispatches. Enver Pasha’s instructions lay on the 
top. 

“Your Excellency has had an important courier?” 

“Don’t disturb yourself, Colonel,” Jemal replied. “Nothing 
that really matters here depends on the Minister of War, but 
solely on me.” One red hand gripped Enver’s dispatch, which 
the other tore into minute shreds, and strewed them out of the 
window, as far as to the citadel of David. Gabriel Bagradian 
had found an involuntary ally. This touchy potentate neither 
answered, nor would he send one cannon, one machine-gun, to 
Antakiya, to smoke out Musa Dagh. 

Jemal Pasha’s refusal to intervene had saved the mountain 
camp from sudden destruction, not from a slower, constrict- 
ing process. The dictator of Syria and Palestine might himself 
refuse to take a hand. But there were other, subordinate com- 
mands, with powers to act independently. The keen, hatchet- 
faced major reigned m Antakiya m place of the poor cashiered 
bimbashi. He contrived to get the general in Aleppo to detach 
several companies from the garrison there. The Wali also 
wrote to the Kaimakam, to expect the arrival of a large rein- 
forcement of saptiehs. So that the Kaimakam had had success 
from his move in the Aleppo quarter. And success stimulates 
ambition. 

Bagradian, as he stood at his observation post, had often felt 
as though the Damlayik were a dead point in a wide vortex, a 
centre of absolute rigidity, in a swirling and very hostile world. 
And today, as ox-carts, loaded mules, and crowds came stream- 
ing into the valley, the movement round this one dead point 
began to take most visible form. What was the meaning of the 
flood? . . . 

The Kaimakam, who saw the hour approach when outstand- 
ing pohtical services should place him in the forefront of the 
party, had contnved to weave a new, strong thread of destruc- 

4*3 



tion into the mesh that bound the Armenian people. He had 
talcffn advantage of the Arab nationalist movement, which 
for some time past had kept Syrian officials with their hands 
full. Such widely extensive secret societies as El Ahd, “the 
Oath,” and the “Arab Brotherhood” were disseminating fiery 
propaganda against Istanbul with the object of uniting all 
Arab tribes into one independent state. Here, as everywhere 
else in the world, nationalism had set to work to break up the 
rich, indeed profoundly rehgious concepts of the state into their 
paltry biological components. The Caliphate is a divine idea, 
but Turk, Kurd, Armenian, Arab denote only terrestrial acci- 
dents. The pashas of former days knew well enough that their 
concept of all-embracing spiritual unity— the Caliphate — ^was 
nobler than the uneasy itch of pushful entities for “progress.” 
In the indolence and vice of the old empire, its laisser-dler, 
there lay concealed a cautious wisdom, a moderating, resigned 
governing principle, which entirely escaped short-sighted west- 
erners striving after quick results. The old pashas knew with 
the subtlest instinct that a noble, even if ruined palace will not 
bear too much renovation. But the Young Turks managed to 
destroy the work of centuries in a breath. They did what they, 
the chiefs of a state comprising several races, never should 
have done. Their mad jingoism aroused that of subject peo- 
ples. Yet let us be just to the world’s fools. It is a dull eye that; 
can see no author behind the play. Men want what they must. 
The vast, supernatural ties of empire are loosened. It only 
means that God has swept the chessboard clear, and begun a 
new game against Hims^. 

In any case, Arab nanonahsm was on the march. From the 
south it spread through Turkey to the hne Mosul-Mersina- 
Adana. In the Syrian vilayets it was very much a factor to be 
reckoned with, since already, on the rear of the Fourth Army, 
or on Its flanks, that mutinous envy spread abroad which so 
endangers an army in the field. All the uproar against the poor 
bimbashi in Antioch had its secret source in this envious mood. 

414 



Alui the Kaimakam had the inspiration to win over this-sitO' 
mering Arab populace at the Armenians’ expense. All Arme> 
nian property, by the text of the law of deportation, went to 
the state; that at least was how it stood on paper. In reality it 
was left to the discretion of provincial governors to make 
what use of it they pleased. On the very day after the last dis- 
aster on Musa Dagh, the Kaimakam had begun to send out 
officials into all districts with a numerous Arab population 
wi thin possible reach of the seven villages. In each he had 
caused it to be proclaimed that the most fruitful land in the 
whole of Syria, between Suedia and Ras el-Khanzir, with vines 
and orchards, silkworm and bee farms, richly treed and 
watered, with houses and barns, was to be freely parcelled out 
among all those who should arrive forty-eight hours later to 
setde m the Armenian valley. The mudirs slyly suggested 
that industrious Arab cultivators were to be given the prefer- 
ence over Turks. 

Hence this astonishing migration. The Kaimakam had come 
in person for an indefinite stay in Yoghonoluk, to supervise 
this parcelling out of land, and ingratiate himself with the 
Arab notables. He took up his quarters in Villa Bagradian. 
In forty-eight hours the villages looked as populous as ever. 
Arabs and Turks, grown rich, began to fraternize. Never had 
they seen such houses. Palaces! It seemed almost a pity to live 
in them. In a trice the church had become a mosque. Allah 
was praised in it that same night. The mullahs thanked Him 
for all these new and bounteous gifts — though it is true that a 
shadow still lay over them, smee up there the insolent Chris- 
uans were still alive. It was every behever’s duty to help ex- 
terminate them. Only when that was accomplished, could they 
settle down to enjoy these blessings, as just men should. The 
men came out of the mosque with glittering eyes. They too 
were hotly eager to make quick work of those whose places 
they had taken so that a vaguer nagging uneasiness in their 
honest peasant hearts might cease to trouble them 

4>5 



The men above grimly watched their houses being occupied. 
Blit to them it was all the same. 

What had happened to time? How many eternities did a day 
need to creep into night ? And yet how quickly the day passed 
in comparison to night, the snail! Where was Juliette? Had 
she been living long in this tent? Had she ever lived in a 
house? Had she lived in Europe long ago? Certainly this 
could not be Juliette, who now hved captive among the moun- 
tain folk. Certainly it could not be Juliette who awoke each 
morning with the same start of horrible surprise. A tired, pale 
creature slipped out of bed, stood on the rug, pulled off a night- 
gown, sat on the camp chair, at the looking-glass, to examine 
a pale, yet sun-scarred, face. Could it be Juliette? Could the 
face, with its dull eyes and brittle hair, please any young man? 
Juliette, for the last few days, had dismissed her maid in 
the early morning. She had begun, with nervous hands, as 
though she were committing a crime, to attempt some kind of 
toilette, with what was left of her many essences. Then she 
had dressed, tied on a big white apron and, round her hair, a 
napkin, like a coif. It was all she ever wore, now she worked 
in the hospital. Coif and apron gave moral support. They felt 
like a uniform. Uniforms were de rtgueur on Musa Dagh. 

Before coming out of the tent Juliette would fall on her 
knees, and embrace her pillow, thrusting away daylight once 
again. At first, days (years?) ago she had merely felt bewil- 
dered and unhappy. But now she longed for such guildcss un- 
happiness. Never, since the world began, had any woman be- 
haved so basely — she, a true, a self-respecting wife, in whose 
long marriage there had been not one single “affair.” But 
would not a hundred affairs in Pans have been as nothing 
compared to this meanest, basest treachery, in the midst of a 
desperate struggle with certain death? Juliette knelt like a 
little girl, whispering, “I can’t help it,” into her pillow. What 

416 



use was that? By magic, how she could not tell, here in this 
inexorable “foreignness" she had surrendered to what seemed 
most akin. In a very low voice, as though to summon some 
counter-force from herself, she cried out, “Gabriel!” But Ga- 
briel had vanished as much as Juhette. Less and less could she 
discover his true image in that album of faded photographs, 
her memory. And the unknown, bearded, brown Armenian 
who, now and then, came in to sit with her — what had he to 
do with Gabriel? Juliette felt scared of her own tears, wiped 
her eyes carefully, and waited until they looked a little less 
red and hideous. 

Bedros Altouni had had all those patients who were not 
feverish dismissed and carried back to their huts. Though he 
gave no definite reasons for having done it, he had somewhat 
ticklish ones. The news of the Armenian victory of August 
14 had spread like wildfire through plain and mountains. It 
had appealed especially to deserters in hiding in the surround- 
ing hills. On the very next day twenty-two of them had come 
to the outposts and asked to be taken into camp. Gabriel, who 
had to be on his guard against spies and traitors, had closely 
cross-questioned them. But, since losses had to be made up, 
since they all appeared to be Armenians, and since each had 
a rifie and cartridges, he took them all in. Among them was 
a very young man who looked bewildered, and seemed uneasy. 
He declared that only a few days before he had escaped from 
barracks at Aleppo, and that the long tramp had worn him 
out. But that same evening, deathly pale, the young man had 
come into the hospital-hut where, having mumbled something 
umntelligible, he had collapsed. Altoum had stripped him at 
once. The poor lad chattered and shook with fever. His chest 
was a mass of red spots, which increased considerably in the 
night. Bedros consulted his Handbook, a thing he had not 
done for a long time. Its hieroglyphics were unreadable. He 
asked the Frenchwoman’s advice: 

4*7 



“My dear, just have a look at this on^ will you? What do 
you t hink ?” 

Juliette was not the kind of woman who gets used to the 
horrors of disease. Each time she entered this nightmare hut 
she had to make an effort not to be sick. She did her best, her 
share of everything, and yet her shudders of nausea increased, 
the longer she stayed, instead of diminishing. Yet now incom- 
prehensible ecstasy filled her. It was as though she could atone 
for her guilty betrayal— here and now. This scrubby, sour- 
smcihng creature at her feet, with spitde dnbbhng from his 
mouth, twisting and turning imconsciously in delirium, was 
Stephan and Gabriel in one. Juliette kndt beside him and 
leaned her head— as though she herself were slowly fainting 
— with closed eyes, on his shrunken chest. 

Gonzaguc’s voice starded her awake: “What on earth are 
you doing, Juliette? You must be crazy.” 

And the old doctor seemed as conscience-stricken as Madame 
Bagradian herself: “It’d really be better, my dear, if you came 
here less, and didn’t work so hard.” 

Gonzague caught her eye secretively. She followed, obedient. 
In his case, too, Juliette had lost her sense of time. It was all 
confused. How had it happened? In which of her pasts? Since 
when had she followed drfenceless. whenever he called? How 
dense and heavy this silence and complicity, even now. But* 
he had not changed. The same impenetrable alertness of eyes 
and thoughts, and never an unguarded second. Camp life had 
done nothing to his appearance; his hair was as neatly brushed 
as ever, his coat as spodess, his body as clean, his skin as clear, 
his breath untainted. Was she in love with him? No; it was 
somethmg far more horrible. Since unhappy love, if only in a 
dream, can devise some path, some way of escape. This sensa- 
tion was pitiless. Often C^nzague seemed as remote as Gabriel. 
He, at first the trusted, the famihar, the pleasandy “lost” child, 
who aroused comradeship and pity, had changed into a crud 
inevitabihty, from which there could be no escape. When he 

418 



toudied her, she felt what she had never felt. But each touch 
made her loathe her treachery more. Many of the embowered 
and wooded solitudes along these chffs had become accom* 
plices. Her ebbing pride cried out in Juliette: "I — ^here on the 
ground — I? . . .” Yet each time Gonzague seemed to contrive 
to efface all ugliness. Perhaps he had a genius for the mo- 
ment, just as there are gamblers, huntsmen, collectors, who 
have trained one faculty to its uttermost. At least he ahared 
such people’s inexhaustible patience. She had lured Gonzague 
on to the Damlayik; modest yet assured, he had bided his time. 
His concentration evoked in Juhette its opposite, inattention, 
and lamed her will. Often she was devoured by absent- 
mindedness. They sat down to rest in a quiet place, which they 
called “the Riviera” between themselves. 

Gonzague broke a cigarette, and ht one half carefully. “I’ve 
still got fifty.” Then, as though to give a more cheerful torn 
to this sad thought of tobacco running out: “Weil, we shan’t 
be here so much longer.” 

She stared at him without seeing he was there. 

“I suggest we get out of this, you and I. It’s about time.” 

She still seemed not to hear what he was saying. He ex- 
plained his plan with the driest precision. Only the first two 
hours might be a bit difficult. A day’s excursion, south, alopg, 
the mountain-ridge— that was all it was. One might have to do 
a little climbing to get down on the right from the uny village 
of Habaste to the Orontes plain and the road to Suedia. He’d 
used last night to get the he of all that ground, and, quite 
easily, without having met a soul, got within a square mile of 
the alcohol factory and into the manager’s house, who, as 
Juliette knew, was a Greek, and a most influential person. I( 
was amazing how simply it could be done. 

“The manager’s entirely at our disposal. On August 26 the 
litde factory steamer sails with a cargo for Beirut. She’ll stop 
there on her way to Latakia and Tripoli, and, according to 
schedule, she ought to touch Beurut on the twenty-ninth. Shr. 

419 



saik under the American dag. You se^ it’s an American firm. 
The manager’s certain there won’t be the slightest danger, 
because at that time the Cyprus fleet is putting out again. 
You’ll have your own cabin, Juhette! When we’re in Beirut, 
you’ll have won. All the rest is just a question of money. And 
that you’ve got . . .” 

Her eyes looked blank. “And Stephan and Gabriel.?” 

Gonzague was blowing ash off his coat. “Stephan and Ga- 
briel? They’d be taken anywhere for Armenians. But I asked 
the manager about them. He says he can’t do anything for 
Armenians. He’s so well in with the Turkish government he 
can’t afford to take any risks. He said so definitely. So, un- 
luckily, Gabriel and Stephan can’t be rescued.” 

Juliette drew away from him. “And I’m to let myself be 
rescued. ... By you?” 

Gonzague jerked his head almost imperceptibly, unable, it 
appeared, to feel any sympathy with the woman’s exaggerated 
scruples. “Well, you know how he himself wanted to send 
you! And with me, what’s more.” 

She pressed both fists into her temples. “Yes, he wanted to 
send me and Stephan. . . . And I’ve done this to him. . . . 
And I he to him! . . .” 

“You shan’t go on lying, Juliette. I’d be the last to want that 
of you. On the contrary I You must tell him the whole thing.. 
Better do it today.” 

Juliette sprang up. Her face looked very red and bloated. 
“What? You want me to kill him? He has the lives of five 
thousand people m his hands. And, at a time like this. I’m 
to kill him!” 

“You distort everything by exaggerating,” said Gonzague, 
still seated and very serious. “Usudly it’s strangers we kiH- 
One sees that every day. But someumes we’re forced to choose 
between our own lives and those of what we call our ‘nearest 
and dearest.’ Is Gabriel really your nearest and dearest? And 
will it really kill him if you escape, Juhette?” 

430 



Such calm words, his self-assured eyes, brought her back to 
his side. Gonzague seized Juliette’s hand and lucidly ex- 
pounded his philosophy. Each of us has only one life. His only 
duty is towards this single, never to be repeated, life; towards 
nothing and nobody else! And what is the truest essence 
life.^ What does life consist in? It consists in one long chain 
of desires and appetites. Though often we may only imagine 
we want a thing, the essential is that we want it intensely. Our 
duty is ruthlessly to satisfy our desires and appetites. That is 
the one and only “meaning” of life. That is why we expose 
ourselves to danger, even death, for something we want, since; 
outside this urge to satisfaction, there can be no life. Gonzague 
gave himself as an instance of the only logical, straightforward 
way of behaving. He had not hesitated a second to accept dis- 
comfort and danger for something he loved. He concluded dis- 
dainfully: “But all that you, Juliette, mistake for love and self- 
sacrifice IS no more than convenient anxiety.” 

Her head dropped heavily on his shoulder. She was steeped 
again in tormenting absent-mindedness. “You’re so tidy, Gon- 
zague. Don’t be so horribly clear and orderly, Gonzague. I 
can’t stand itl Why aren’t you the same as you used to be?” 

His light hand, a miracle of tender awakenings, passed strok- 
ing down the length of her arm, over her breast, down to Jicr 
hips. She broke into babbling sobs. Gonzague comforted her: 

“You’ve still got time, yet, to make up your mind. Seven 
long days. And, after all, who knows what may happen in the 
meantime . . .” 

Ter Haigasun after a long interval had summoned the entire 
Council of Leaders. They sat on the long bench in the council- 
room of the government-hut. Only Apothecary Krikor, as his 
habit was, heard the discussion from his sleeping-apartment, 
without himself saying a word. The sage, it appeared, had, 
with the object of perfecting his inner life, almost entirely re- 
nounced human contacts. He spoke to scarcely anyone now 

421 



but himself, though in the depth of night his soliloquies went 
on and on. Nobody hearing them would have beu in the 
least the wiser. For Krikor merely ranged long lines of im- 
posing encyclopzdic concepts in, so to speak, dreamy single 
file. As for instance: “Burning core of the earth — celestial axis 
— swarm of the Pleiades — ^fructification of blossom . . Such 
high-sounding concepts seemed to raise Krikor’s soul above 
itself, bringing it nearer the underlying cause of all things. He 
tossed them in the air. They hovered in swarms above his 
head. Out of them he fashioned a dome, set with the glimmer- 
ing mosaics of Science, under which he lay with the enigmatic 
smile of a Buddhist priest. There exists a degree of ascetic 
perfection too elevated to permit of its being shared, since 
everything exalted is also asocial. Krikor had perhaps attained 
it, he no longer taught. The Leaders, his former disciples, never 
came near him now, or even mquired for him. The days were 
done when, on nighdy walks with Oskaman, Shatakhian, 
Asayan, and other dust-<levouring mortals, Krikor had named 
the stars and numbered them, out of his own mind. Now 
these giant stars, these giant worlds, circled in silence within 
his bram, and the sage had ceased to feel any pricking urge to 
give of them enthusiastic tidings. Krikor scaredy got an hour’s 
sleep. A fierce pain, worse every day, cramped his joints and 
tendons. When, noticing he was ill, his old friend Bedros, 
Altouni asked medical questions, he received a triumphant 
Latin answer: "Rheumattsmus articulortim et musculorum” 
Not a word of complaint passed Krikor’s lips. He had been 
sent this illness to preserve the supremacy of the spirit. It had 
no other consequence. Everythmg around him drifted away. 
Reality grew buzzingly remote. So that, as, for instance today, 
the men sat discussing, he heard their words with the staring 
eyes, the uncomprehending, muttering lips, of a deaf-mute. 
It was as though the words which expressed such earthly neces- 
sity had almost ceased to have a meaning. 

This time they talked for hours. Avakian and the pari«ti 

4 » 



dark of Yoghonoluk sat apart, taking notes of their chief reso> 
lutions, to be shaped into minutes. The camp guard had been 
posted outside the government-hut — a personal edict of Ter 
Haigasun. Since then priest was not given to formal gestures, 
it must be supposed that he had some good and far-sighted 
reason for taking this protective measure. Today the guard had 
only the duty of shielding the Council from interrupuon, 
keeping unauthorized persons out of the hut. Later, more dan- 
gerous sittings might have to be held, on days when the Coun- 
cil needed protection. Ter Haigasun presided with half-shut 
eyes, as frostily weary-looking as ever. Pastor Aram Tomasian, 
as chief supervisor of the domestic economy of the camp, read 
out his report on the state of food supplies, which the priest 
had set down as the first item on the agenda. He gave an exact 
picture. Following on the first, disastrous hailstorm, the direct 
hit of the shrapnel had not only destroyed their remaining 
flour, but all their other precious stores: aU oil, all wine, sugar, 
honey, and— apart from unnecessary things like tobacco and 
coffee — that first of all necessiues, salt. There was only enough 
salt left to cure their meat for three more days. And the meat 
itself, which every stomach already rebelled against, was dimin- 
ishing at a really alarming extent. The mukhtars, who were 
present, had arranged a count of remaining cattle, and reck- 
oned that, since they had lived on Musa Dagh, the collective 
herds had shrunk by a third. Such economy could no longer 
continue, as supplies would very soon be exhausted. The pastor 
asked the mukhtar, Thomas Kebussyan, as an expert breeder, 
to explain the state of the herds. Kebussyan stood up, wagged 
his head. His squinting peasant’s eyes stared at all and no- 
body. He launched out on a string of moving complaints over 
the loss of his own beautiful sheep, which it had taken him so 
many years of industrious breeding to rear. In the gulden days 
before the migration, a full-grown wether had weighed any- 
thing from forty-five to fifty okas. Now it scarcely weight 
half that. The mukhtar attributed this to two special reasons. 

423 



The first o£ these was sentimental. This cursed communal 
ownership — not that he did not admit that it was necessary— 
was bad for the sheep. He knew his sheep. They were getting 
thin because they belonged to nobody, because they couldn’t 
feel any master worrying about them, their good or bad 
health. His second reason was less political, more enhghtening. 
All the best pasture in the enclosure, which had not only to 
feed the sheep, but goats and donkeys into the bargain, was 
almost cropped down. The sheep were being badly foddered; 
how could they be expected to put on fat, or tender flesh 
even? And it wasn’t any better with the milk. You couldn’t 
so much as think of butter or cheese any longer, Kebussyan 
concluded in a whine; some other pasturage was essential if 
they wanted to improve the condition of the stock. 

Gabriel opposed this very decisively. These weren’t the pip- 
ing times of peace; at best this was hfe in a Noah’s Ark, on a 
deluge of blood. There could be no question of allowing peo- 
ple or herds to stray as they pleased. Turkish spies were all 
round the camp enclosure. To let the herds graze outside that 
enclosure, especially on the northerly heights, would be more 
of a risk than anyone dare take on himself. Damn it I There 
must surely be some other pasturage, within the camp. 
Couldn’t they drive the herds up the steeps? 

"The grass up there is short and all burnt out,” interrupted 
the Mukhtar of Habibli; “even camels couldn’t manage it.” 

Gabriel refused to be led astray. “Better that we should have 
less meat than none at all'” 

Ter Haigasun endorsed Bagradian’s warning and asked the 
pastor to finish his report. Aram went on to the lack of bread, 
and the consequences of unmixed meat-eating. There were a 
hundred reasons, besides this diminishing of the herds, for 
trying to find some other food besides meat. Forays into the 
valley were out of the question, now that all the villages were 
reoccupied. On the other hand Bedros Altouni would agree 
with him that the people’s fiealth would be bound to suffer 

424 



in the end, unless some other food could be found. They could 
see for themselves how much sallower and thinner people 
were looking. They must all have felt it. So that a change of 
diet would have to be made possible at all costs. 

And Pastor Tomasian had a scheme. So far they had all neg- 
lected the sea. At certain points along the cliffs it was possible 
to climb down to it in half an hour. He himself had discovered 
a disused mule-track which could easily be built up and made 
fit to use. What was the good of having skilled road-menders 
both among the villagers and deserters? Two days’ work, and 
there would be a very easy road down to the beacL They must 
form a group of young people, the strongest women and 
biggest lads of the cohort of youth, to lay out a salting-ground 
down in the hollow under the cliffs. A raft, knocked together 
out of tree trunks and a few oars, would be enough to put 
out to a calmer place, a few hundred yards out to sea. The 
women could set to work that very day making draw-nets. 
There was plenty of twine m the camp. And another thing! 
He, Aram, remembered that as a boy he had always been out 
stoning birds. The boys of Yoghonoluk must be much the 
same nowadays. Well, let them all bring out their catapults! 
Instead of hanging about and getting under people’s feet, the 
lads ought all to be out bird-killing. 

The pastor’s suggestions were applauded and discussed in 
detail. The Council empowered him to organize these proj- 
ects for food supplies. Then Bedros Altouni gave his health 
report. Of the twenty-four wounded in the last battle all, thank 
God, except four, who were still feverish, were out of danger. 
Twenty-eight he had already sent back home, to be looked 
after by their families. They would soon all be ready for the 
line again. But what gave the doctor cause for far worse un- 
easiness was the strange new illness brought into camp by a 
young deserter from Aleppo. Since last night the boy had been 
on the point of death, and was probably dead by this time. But 
worse still, the other hospital patients had begun to show signs 

425 



ol being infecterf by him; cases of sudden vonutmg and high 
fever and choking fits. So it must be a case of that epidemic 
of which he now remembered seeing accounts, in tbe last 
few months, in Aleppo newspapers. But one epidemic of this 
description was as dangerous to the camp as were the Turks. 
Early that mormng therefore he had made arrangements 
for the strictest isolaUon of all these cases. Far from the Town 
Enclosure, as everyone knew, there was a small, shady box- 
wood, with a stream between two high mounds. It was well 
out of the way of both the decads and workers. He suggested 
that the Council form a group of hospital attendants, out 
of all the least useful people m camp, who must also be kept 
apart from everyone else. Bedros gave Kevork, the sunflqwer- 
dancer, as an instance of the kmd of person he meant. He 
obviously would be ideal as a nurse. He turned to Gabriel. 

“My friend, I must ask you particularly to beg Juhette 
Hanum not to come back to the hospital-tent. I shall be 
losing a very good assistant. But frankly her health is more 
important to me than her help. Even apart from any danger of 
infection. I’m worried about your wife, my son! We others 
are hardy sort of people, and scarcely a mile away from our 
homes. But your wife has changed a good deal smee we’ve 
been on the Damlayik. She sometimes gives me very queer 
answers, and she seems not only to suffer physically. She isn’( 
strong enough for this life. How could she possibly be? I 
advise you to look after her more. Tbe best thing for her 
would be to stay in bed all day, and read novels, and get her 
mind far away from here. Luckily Krikor could supply a whole 
townful of ladies with enough French novels to make them 
forget their troubles." 

Altouni’s warning startled Gabriel into a sense of guilt. He 
remembered that it was almost two days since he had last 
spoken to Juliette. 

Hapeth Shatakhian now began a vehement complaint at the 
undi^plined state of the boys. Impossible to make them come 

426 



to adiooL Ever sioce St^han Bagradian and Haik had cap- 
tured the howitzers, the whole cohort of youth had got out 
of hand. They felt themselves full-grown fighters, and were 
constandy cheeky to the grown-ups. 

The mukhtars fully endorsed the teacher’s complaint 
“Where are the days,” yammered he of Bitias, “when boys 
weren’t even allowed to speak to men, but had to use humble 
signs in addressing them?” 

But Ter Haigasun did not feel the problem of sufScient im- 
mediate urgency to discuss. Suddenly he asked Bagradian: 
“How does our defence really stand? What’s the longest you’ll 
be ^ble to hold out against the Turks?” 

“I can’t answer that, Ter Haigasun. Defence always depends 
on attack.” 

Ter Haigasun turned shyly resolute eyes, the eyes of a 
priest, directly on Gabriel. “Gabriel Bagradian, tell us what 
you really think.” 

“I have no reason to want to spare the Council, Ter Haiga- 
sun. I'm pcrfecdy sure our position is desperate.” 

Then Gabriel made an important suggestion. Absurd as the 
hope of rescue might appear, the Council must not allow itself 
to await inevitable destruction in effortless indolence. To be 
sure the sea looked as horribly empty as though ships had never 
been invented. But no stone must be left unturned. And after 
all, God knew whether, against all probability, there might 
not be an Allied torpedo boat outside the Gulf of Alexan- 
dretta. 

“It’s our duty to suppose there is, and it’s our duty to act on 
the supposition, and not miss a possible chance. And then 
what about Mr. Jackson, the American Chief Consul m 
Aleppo? Has he heard of these Christian fighters in need, on 
Musa Dagh? It’s our duty to let him know about us and 
demand protection from the American government.” 

So Gabriel explained his plan: two groups of messengers 
would have to tx sent out, one to Alei^chetta, the other to 



Aleppo— the best swimmers to Alexandretta, the best runners 
to Aleppo. The swimmers’ task would be easier, since the 
Gulf of Alexandretta was only thirty-five English miles to the 
north, and they could find their way across the summits of 
almost deserted mountains. Their real object would be to swim 
out to any warship in the gulf. It would need the greatest 
strength and determination. The runners to Aleppo would 
not need to be so determmed, but they would have an eighty- 
five-mile road to cover and would be able to walk only at 
night, never using the highroad, and in constant danger of 
being shot. If these couriers managed to reach Jackson’s house, 
the camp might be as good as saved. 

Gabriel’s suggestion, which after all afforded some vague 
hope of rescue, and served in any case to alleviate the im- 
pending certainty of death, was most eagerly and generally 
discussed. It was decided to send out two swimmers. One 
young man might be enough to send to Aleppo. There was no 
sense in uselessly exposing lives Two people can hide better 
than three, and one person finds it easier to slip past saptichs 
and customs officials than two. On Ter Haigasun’s suggestion, 
the swimmers and the runner were to be chosen from among 
the volunteers. The runners (either one or both, it was «till 
not decided) would be given a letter to take to the American 
consul; the swimmers, another addressed to the supposititious 
naval commander. To prevent these letters from falling into 
Turkish hands, should either of the messengers get arrested, 
the leather belts which the couriers wore were to be split open 
and the letters sewn up inside them. 

Ter Haigasun appointed a day and hour at which to de- 
mand volunteers, and arranged the method of the announce- 
ment. The munadirs should be instructed to drum it rhar 
same evening around the camp. Gabriel offered to write the 
letter to Jackson. Aram Tomasian undertook the other, to the 
ship. He at once went apart from the rest and drafted the 
text to give to the swimmers, in spite of all the noise of a 

428 



new point under discussion. From time to time he seemed 
carried away by his composition, would suddenly spring up 
and read out a passage, with the majestic intonation of a parson 
learning his sermon by heart. It did not take him long to finish 
it. It has been preserved as a document of the forty days: 

To any English, American, French, Russian, or Italian admiral, 
captain, or other commander whom this may reach: 

Sir! We beseech you in the name of God and human brother* 
hood — ^we, the population of seven Armenian villages, in all about 
five thousand souls, who have taken refuge on that mountain 
plateau of Musa Dagh, known as the Damlayik, and three leagues 
north-west of Suedia above the oiasdine. 

We have taken refuge here from barbarous Turkish persecu- 
tions. We have taken up arms to preserve the honour of our 
women. 

Sir! You no doubt have heard of the Young Turkish policy 
which seeks to annihilate our people. Under the false appearance 
of a migration-law, on the lymg pretext of some non-existent 
movement for revolution, they are turning us out of our houses, 
robbing us of our farms, orchards, vineyards, and all our movable 
and immovable goods and chattels. This, to our personal knowl- 
edge, has already been done in the town of Zeitun and its thirty- 
three dependent villages. 

Pastor Aram went on to describe his experiences on the con- 
voy between Zeitun and Marash. He told of the edict of 
banishment issued against the seven villages, and gave vehe- 
ment descriptions of the desperate plight of the villagers in 
camp on the Damlayik. His appeal ended as follows: 

Sir, we beg you m the name of ChristI 

Bring us, we implore you, either to Cyprus or any other free 
territory. Our people are not idlers. We want to earn our bread 
with the hardest possible work in so far as we are given a chance 
to do it. But if this is too much for you to grant us, then at least 
take our women, take our children, take our old people. At least 
supjAy those of us able to bear arms with guns, mumtions, and 

429 



tnouj^ food to defend eundve* to the last bieadi in our bo£es 
against our enemies. 

We implore you, sir, not to delay until it is too late! 

In the name of all the Christians up here 

Your most obedient servant. 
Pastor A.T. 

This manifesto was drafted in two languages— on one side 
of the sheet in French, on the other in English. The two texts 
were carefully revised under the zgis of Hapeth Shatakhian, 
that accomplished Imguist and stylist. But the task of copying 
them out, in minute and beautifully shaped letters, was, 
strangely enough, not entrusted to teacher Oskanian, famed 
far and wide as possessor of the best calligraphy, in every 
alphabet, but to Avakian, a far less expert artist. Hrand 
Oskanian leapt out of his seat and glowered at Ter Haigasun 
as though he were going to challenge him to a dud in front 
of the assembled Council. This new humihation bereft him 
of words, his lips moved but could form no sounds. But the 
priest, bis mortal enemy, only smiled blandly at him. 

“Sit down and be quiet. Teacher Oskanian, you write far 
too beautiful a hand for this jdi. Nobody who saw all your 
squiggles and flourishes could ever bdieve our position was 
desperate.” ^ 

The black'haired dwarf advanced on Ter Haigasun with 
his head high. “Priest! You’ve mistaken your man. God 
knows I am not anxious to do your scribbling!” He shook his 
fists in Ter Haigasun’s face as he added in a voice unsteady 
with rage; “There’s no calligraphy left in these hands, Priestl 
These hands have given proof of something very different, 
much as it riles you!” 

Apart from which absurd little inadent the sitting had 
been held in perfect amity. Even the sceptical Ter Haigasun 
could hope that, whatever happened in the near future^ peart» 
at least would reign unbroken among the elect. 

430 



Again after that day’s council Gabriel went to look for his 
wife, both in her tent and the place where she received her 
visitors. Here, too, Oskanian and Shatakhian had come in 
vain, as they had so often m these last days, to pay their re- 
spects to Madame. Hrand Oskanian especially had been ex- 
tremely disappointed at not being able to display himself to 
Juliette as the Lion of the South Bastion. He could only set 
his teeth and admit that a tailor’s dummy like Gonzague 
was more welcome than a powder-blackened hero. But mis- 
trustful and silent as he was, he never got as far as suspicion. 
Madame Bagradian was too supremely far above him to allow 
of one such unseemly thought. When Gabriel caught sight of 
the teachers, he turned away quickly. He wandered mde- 
cisively on from Three-Tent Square towards the “Riviera.” 
Where, he wondered, would Juhette be at about this time? 
He had turned towards the Town Enclosure when Stephan 
ran across his path. The boy was as usual surrounded by the 
whole Haik gang. The dour Haik himself walked on a few 
paces ahead, as if to set a distance, proclaim his leadership, 
his own doughty independence. But the poor crippled Hagop 
kept obstinately beside Stephan while the others swarmed 
noisily round them. Sato lurked as usual in the rear. The 
boys paid no heed at all to the presence of the co mm anderit 
in<hicf; they tried to swarm past him without saluting, with- 
out even noticing he was there. Gabriel called sharply after 
his son. That conqueror of the guns detached himself, came 
slouching out from among his fellows, and approached his 
father with the solemn pomposity of an ape; which he had 
managed to learn from his new comrades. His tousled hair 
hung over his forehead. His face was scarlet and damp with 
sweat. His eyes looked filmed over with the very intoxication 
of conceit. Even his kilt was stained and torn with peculiar 
heroism. 

Gabriel sternly inquired: “Wdl, what are you messing about 
here for?” 


43» 



Stephan gurgled and looked round vaguely. “We’re run- 
ning — Shaving a game . . . we’re off duty.” 

“Having a game? Big chaps hke you? What are you play- 
ing?” 

“Oh, nothing special— only . . . playing, Dad!” 

As he gave this disconnected information, Stephan eyed 
his father rather strangely. He seemed to look up at him and 
say; Dad, why are you trying to keep me down out of the 
position I’ve had such trouble to get, among all these chaps? 
If you snub me now, they’ll all begin ragging me. Gabriel did 
not understand the look. 

“You don’t look like a human being, Stephan. Do you 
really dare to let your mother see you in that state?” 

The boy did not answer, he only stared at the ground in 
anguish. So far at least his father had been speaking French. 
But the order that followed came in Armenian; it was spoken 
so that the whole camp heard: “Off you go now, straight to 
the tent and wash, and change your clothesl And report to 
me tonight when you’re fit to be seen'” 

Then, when Gabriel had gone a few angry steps further 
south, he suddenly stopped. Had the boy disobeyed him? He 
was almost certain that he had, and indeed when, after a 
while, he went back to the sheikh-tent, he found no Stephan. 

Gabriel tried to think of a punishment. This was not merely 
a case of a boy’s disobeying his father, it was a breach of 
camp disapline. But it would not be easy to punish Stephan. 
Gabriel went across to his trunk, which was kept in his tent, 
and pulled out a book. Dr. Altoum’s advice that Juhette 
should read, and so get her mind off gruesome reality, had 
given him the same inclinauon. Perhaps, for the next few, 
dack hours, he could manage to forget reality, both outside 
and inescapably within him For today, nothing need be feared. 
The day wore on. Scouts from the various outposts came in 
every hour with their reports. Nothing new in the valley. 
A patrol had ventured nearly as far as Yoghonoluk and re- 

43a 



turned to report that it had not met a single saptieh. Gabriel 
glanced at the title of his French novel. It was by Charles 
Louis Philippe, a book he had enjoyed, though he only half 
remembered it. But it was sure to be full of little cafes, with 
tables and chairs, out on the pavement. Wide sunbeams on 
dusty faubourg boulevards. A tiny court with an acacia and a 
moss-green, closed-in fountain in the middle. And this poor 
court had more of the spring in it than all the glamorous 
myrtles and rhododendrons, anemones and wild narassi, of 
Musa Dagh on a March day. Old dark wooden stairs, worn 
smooth as sea-shells. Invisible footsteps clattering up them. 

As Gabriel opened the book, a little three-cornered note 
fell out of It. The child Stephan had written it a few years 
previously. That, too, had been in August. Gabriel had at- 
tended the big conference assembled in Pans between the 
Young Turks and Dashnakzagan. Juliette and the child had 
been staying in Montreux. At that famous “congress of 
fraternization” it had been resolved that the liberty-loving 
youth of both peoples should act side by side to build up a 
new fatherland. Gabriel had, as we know, tried to .keep his 
promise by having himself, with other idealists, inscribed as 
a reservist officer on the lists of the Istanbul training-school 
when war<louds gathered over Turkey. Stephan’s little letter 
had lain since then, innocent of any gruesome future, within 
pages describing the Pans of Charles Louis Philippe. It had 
been written with immense pain, in stiff, French, copy-book 
letters: 

“Mon cher papa< How are you? Will you stay a long time in 
Paris? When are you coming to sec us? Maman and I miss you 
very much. Here it is very pretty Lots of kisses from 

Your loving and grateful son, 

Stephan. 

Gabriel, seated on the bed in which Gonzague Maris slept, 
examined the shaky childish handwriting. How could that 

433 



prettily dressed little boy sitting in a sunny room at Montreux, 
scrawling on Juliette’s thick linen notepaper (which retained 
its scent), be one with the young scamp o£ an hour ago? 
Gabriel, as he sat there thinking of Stephan’s restless animal' 
eyes, of the throaty chatter of the herd, did not know in the 
least that he himself had been transformed as much as his 
son. A hundred details of that far-off day in August came back 
to Me in him, darting into his mind from that simple letter. 
No massacre, no gruesome brutahty, seemed more poignant 
than this withered leaf, shed from a life that mi^t never 
have been. 

After attempting the first five pages of Charles Louis 
Philippe, Gabriel shut the book. He did not think that now, 
as long as he lived, he would ever be able again to fix his 
thoughts on one. It would be just as impossible for a navvy 
to turn his hands to minute carving. With a sigh he stood 
up off Gonzague's bed, and smoothed down the coverlet. He 
noticed then how, across the bed-end, Maris had laid out his 
clean clothes, carefully washed. Thread, scissors, mending- 
wool, lay beside them; tor the Greek did all his own darning 
and mending. Gabriel could not tell why the sight of this 
washing warned him of some approaching departure. He went 
back to his trunk and threw in the novel. But he pocketed the 
child Stephan’s letter. He came out of the tent thinking of 
the station at Montreux. Juliette and litde Stephan had awaited 
him. Juliette had carried a red sunshade. 

Gabriel stood outside Hovsannah’s tent. He asked through 
the chink in the door if he might come in to see the new 
mother. Mairik Antaram asked him inside. In spite of all 
Mairik’s efforts the baby seemed determined not to flourish. 
Its Uny face was sdll a brownish colour, and as wrinkled as 
immediately after birth. Its wide-open eyes stared without 
seeing. 

Mairik Antaram’s voice sounded impatient 

434 



"Cheer up, Hovsaooah, and be g^ad that your baby has a 
birth-maiit on his breast, not on his face. What do you 
expect?” 

Hovsannah closed weary eyes, as though she were tired of 
continually asserting her better nature in face of empty conso- 
lations. 

“Why doesn’t he take his milk? And why doesn’t he cry?" 

Mairik Antaram began to busy herself warming swaddhng- 
dothes round a hot stone. She cried out, without looking up 
from her work: “Wait another two days, till after the christen- 
ing. Lots of children won’t begin to cry ull they’re baptized.” 

Hovsannah grimaced this away. “Provided we can make 
him live till then.” 

The doctor’s wife got very angry. “You’re a wet blanket, 
Madame Tomasian. You depress everybody! Who can say, up 
here on the Damlayik, what’ll have happened in two days, 
to anyone! Christenmg or death? Not even Bagradian Ei- 
fendi could tell you for certain whether we’ll be alive in two 
days.” 

“Wdl, if we are alive,” said Gabrid, smiling, “we must all 
have a christening feast, here outside the tents. I’ve talked to 
the pastor about it. Madame Tomasian, you must say whom 
you want invited.” , 

Hovsannah lay on, indifferent. “I don’t belong to Yoghono- 
luk. I know nobody here.” 

Iskuhi, sitting on her bed, had hstened to all this without 
saying a word. Gabriel eyed her. “Iskuhi Tomasian, would 
you care to come for a walk? My wife’s disappeared. I want 
to look for her.” 

Iskuhi’s face questioned Hovsannah, who with a plaintively 
exaggerated voice urged her to go with Gabriel. “Of course 
you must go, Iskuhi! I shan’t need you. It’ll do you good. You 
can’t help with the swaddling.” 

Iskuhi hesitated, she could feel some hiddim spite in Hovsan- 
nah’s words. But Mairik Antaram insisted: ‘Tou go along, 

435 



Sirclis, my pretty! And don't let me see you again till tonight. 
What sort of a life is this for you!” 

Gabriel and Iskuhi went towards the Town Enclosure, 
though there was not much chance of finding Juliette there. 
They walked between the narrow lines of huts. People were 
sitting out m front of them. The air up here was cooler and 
pleasanter than it had been down m the valley. The sea sighed 
mildly, in long cool breaths. All were at work. The women 
were patching clothes and washing The old men of the reserve 
were plying their trades, soling shoes, planing wood, curing 
lamb and goatskins. Nurhan's munitions works appeared to 
be working overtime. 

They left the camp. They could only exchange monosyl- 
lables. The most trivial questions and replies. They went west- 
wards along the highest peak. Here it was barren. They 
had come out of the wild plateau landscape. They were on 
the verge of a desert without birds’ voices, only stirred by a 
httle breeze, which blew across them, carrying their words to 
one another. 

Gabriel did not look at Iskuhi; it was so good to feel her 
invisibly beside him. Only when they came to steep declines, 
did he watch with delight her hesitant feet which seemed to 
grow so charmingly embarrassed. Then all talk between them 
ceased. What was there to say? Gabriel took Iskubi’s hand. 
(Her lame arm made her walk on the left of him ) As they 
walked she surrendered to him in silence, keeping nothing 
back, insisting on nothing. They did not speak of this em otmtii 
which unfolded so swiftly They never kissed. They went on, 
belonging to one another. Iskuhi went with Gabriel as far 
as the edge of the northern trench. When she had said good- 
bye, he stood there a long time looking after her. No wish, 
no scruple, came to life in him, no vague anxiety, thought of 
the future. Futme? Absurd' He was light with joy from head 
to foot. Iskuhi’s being withdrew so delicately that not one 
thought of her disturbed him as he worked out his new plan 

436 



of defence. Later, when Stephan came to report, he forgot to 
punish the boy for his disobedience. 

The new hfe on Musa Dagh had also its religious conse- 
quences. In the last few decades it had been a sort of fashion 
among Armenians to change one’s creed. Protestantism espe- 
cially, thanks to the efiorts of its German and American mis- 
sionaries, had gained much ground since the middle of the 
previous century. It is enough to remember those admirable 
mission fathers of Marash, whose indefatigable efforts — edu- 
cational, charitable, architectural — had been of such service 
to Cilician and Syrian Armenians, including those of the seven 
communes round Musa Dagh. But it was certainly a most 
fortunate circumstance that religious differences had caused 
no essential rift in the national unity. Christianity itself had 
so hard a struggle against the Turks as to preclude petty spite 
and religious intolerance. Pastor Harutiun Nokhudian of 
Bitias had been quite free in the seven villages to preach his 
doctrine and theology. In all major questions of conduct he 
bad submitted himself to Ter Haigasun. Up here on the 
Damlayik Pastor Aram, his successor, took over the old 
pastor’s duty of ministering to such Protestants as remained, 
though he too submitted to the priest. Ter Haigasun let h^m 
have the use of his altar every Sunday after Mass to deliver 
his sermon, which usually not only Protestants but the whole 
population came to hear. Differences of ritual had ceased to 
matter. Ter Haigasun was the uncontested high priest of this 
mountain, and administered to people’s souls as the superior 
both of Pastor Aram and the smaller married village dergy. 
Therefore it went without saymg that Tomasian should ask 
him to baptize his new-born son. 

The christening had been fixed for the following Sunday, 
the fourth in August, their twenty-third day in camp. But 
Mass and other duties prevented Ter Haigasun undertaking 
it till late m the afternoon of that day. Since Hovsannah was 

437 



still feeling too weak to manage to get as far as the altar, 
Aram had asked the priest to baptize the child on Three- 
Tent Square, so that the mother might be present at the 
ceremony. 

Gabriel kept his promise to Hovsannah and sent out about 
thirty-five invitations, to notables and the most important 
section leaders. The reception into Christ’s communion of 
this first-born on Musa Dagh was a good way of maintaining 
cordial relations with the chief personahties of the people. 
He had still nine ten-litre jars of the heavy local vintage. 
Kristaphor was ordered to bring out two of them and a few 
bottles of mulberry brandy. He could not, to be sure, offer his 
guests more solid refreshment; the food supplies on Three- 
Tent Square were already alarmingly reduced. 

The guests assembled, at four, outside the tents. A few 
chairs had been brought along for the older people. The 
sacristan had stood a htde tin bathtub on a low table. The 
very ancient and beautiful font in the church had had to be 
left behind in Yoghonoluk. Ter Haigasun robed in the sheikh- 
tent. Gabriel, by Aram’s wish, had con^ted to stand gin- 
kahair, godfather. 

The church choir, led by the diminutive Asayan, had taken 
up Its position around the table, with its crucifix and the tin 
font. The lukewarm christening water had already been, 
borne before the altar. Now, to the singing of the choir, one of 
Ter Haigasun’s subordinate priests dropped three drops of the 
sacred christening oil into the tub. 

Gabriel, the ginkahair, gingerly took the child from Mairik 
Antaram. The women, in honour of the occasion, had laid that 
sallow, brownish, puckered objea, which showed no strength, 
on a special cushion — a magmHccnt cushion m view of the 
general circumstances. The child's eyes stared without seeing 
at the world, into whose cruel hfe he had come so guiltless. 
Nor did his voice yet find it worth its while to whimper one 
assent to the light of God, which lights up this cruelty so 

438 



magnificently. Gabriel held out the wretched bundle, which 
seemed in its estrangement to resent being captured by re- 
ligion, with all Its consequences, in front of the priest, as the 
service prescribed. Ter Haigasun’s eyes, so humble, yet so 
coldly sacerdotal, did not seem to know that this was Gabriel. 
Or at least they did not see the man, only the officiating per- 
son, with a ritual duty to discharge. It was always the same 
whenever Ter Haigasun stood at the altar or wore his vest- 
ments. Every human memory and relationship faded out of 
his eyes, to give way to the stern equanimity of his office. He 
asked the ritual question of the godfather. “What does this 
child ask?” And Gabriel, who felt very clumsy, had to answer: 
“Faith and hope and love.” This was repeated three times. 
Only then the question: “And what shall this child be called?” 

He was to be called after his grandfather Master Mikael 
Tomasian. At this point of the ceremony that anaent was 
comically inspired to stand up and make a little bow, as 
though he were being cited to share in the future -of his 
descendant. Opimons differed among the lookers-on as to 
what that future might prove to be. Even if by some miracle 
they were saved, the sickly, apathetic little body would 
scarcely have the strength to hold on to life. Mairik Antaram, 
Iskuhi, and Aram Tomasian had come over to Gabriel. The 
child was unwound from its swaddling-clothes. Iskuhi’s and 
Gabriel’s hands touched more than once. A morose hopeless 
mood was on the spectators. Hovsannah stared with a pinched 
puritamcal face at the group round the font. Something 
seemed to impel her very soul to the bitterest desolation, 
hostility. It may have been the thought of that deep bond be- 
tween Aram and Iskuhi, brother and sister, from which at this 
instant she felt shut out. 

Ter Haigasun took up the child with inimitable, dexterous 
certamty. His hands, vi^ch had christened a thousand chil- 
dren, worked with the almost super-terrestrial grace and ele- 
gance which all born priests display in even the manual part 

439 



of their oflficc. For a second he held out the child to the 
people. Everyone could sec the large red birth-mark on. its 
chest. Then he dipped it quickly, tliree times, in water, making 
the sign of the cross each time with its body. “I baptize thee 
in the name of the Father, of the Son, of the Holy Ghost.” 
Hovsannah had pulled herself up from her seat. She bent 
forward with a convulsive grimace This was the decisive 
moment. Would her child, as it touched the baptismal water, 
break out at last, as Mairik Antaram had promised her, in a 
long wail? Ter Haigasun reached the suckling back to his 
ginkahair. It was not Gabriel, however, but Antaram who 
took him and dried his sickly body, gently, with a soft cloth. 
The child had not cried. But Hovsannah, its mother, shrieked 
aloud. Two long hysterical screams. The chair fell down be- 
hind her back. She hid her face and stumbled into the tent. 
Juliette, sitting at her side, had plainly heard her cry form, and 
repeat, a word: “Sin! Sin'” 

Aram Tomasian remained some time in the tent. He came 
back looking pale and laughed uneasily. “You must forgive 
her. Ter Haigasun. She’s never really managed to get over 
the shock of Zeitun, though she hasn’t shown it up to now.” 

He signed to Iskuhi to go in and look after Hovsannah. 
The girl glanced desperately at Gabriel, and seemed to hesitaPe. 
He said to the pastor: “Couldn’t you leave your sister with us, 
Tomasian.? Mairik Antaram’s in the tent, you know.” 

Tomasian pulled back a chink in the canvas door. “My wife 
has been asking for her so urgentlyl Later, perhaps, when 
Hovsannah’s asleep . . .” 

Iskuhi had already disappeared. Gabriel could feel that the 
pastor’s wife could not brook the fact that, while she herself 
suffered unspeakably, her young sister-in-law should not be 
chained to the same suffering. 

Nor in the ensuing jollificauons could the guests shake o£f 
the weight of this christening. Gabriel had had another long 

440 



table set end to end with the one at which Juliette “received." 
They all sat down along the benches. This arrangement, in 
the eyes of these soaally byper'Sensitive people, seemed to 
indicate a dual treatment, which wounded a number of snob- 
bish souls. The “best people” were all at Juliette’s table. Ter 
Haigasun, the Bagradians, Pastor Tomasian, Krikor, Gonzague 
Mans and — shamelessly — Sarkis Kilikian. Gabriel, who had 
invited that ragged outsider, now even asked him to sit be- 
side him. Madame Kebussyan, on the other hand, in spite of 
the eagerest manceuvrings, had found no seat among the 
notables. She had been forced to take her place with the other 
mayoresses, though her husband’s wealth, notwithstanding 
the fact that she had lost it, should really have set her high 
above them. Gabriel, however, talked almost exclusively to 
Kiltban. He kept beckoning to Missak and Kristaphor to 
fill up the Russian’s tin mug, since Kilikian would only 
drink out of that, and had thrust away the glass set out for 
him. Was it mere stubbornness? Or a deep mistrust in the 
heart of the continually persecuted? Gabriel could not be cer- 
tain. He tried very hard, but qmte unsuccessfully, to get on 
friendly terms with his neighbour. That impassive death’s- 
head with agate eyes, brooding on nothing, would only give 
monosyllabic answers. 

Gabriel’s feelings towards Kilikian were complex. Here was 
a man of some education (three years in the Ejmiadzin Semi- 
nary). Hence, something more than the ordinary Asiatic 
proletarian. And again, his life had been so astounding that 
this young man’s features looked as ravaged by it, his eyes as 
dead, as though he were old. Set against the relentlessness of 
this fate, the common Armenian woe became as a shadow. 
Yet the man had mastered it, or at least he had not succumbed^ 
and that to Gabriel, was enough to prove an unusual per 
sonality— which compelled respect. Yet vague mistrustful feel- 
ings of equal strength counterbalanced this, positive attraction. 
There could he no doubt that Kilikian looked, and had often 


441 



behaved, like a dangerous criminal. His vicissitudes could not 
always have been unmerited; somehow they were too much in 
keeping with his personality as a whole. Impossible to say 
whether prison had made him a criminal or some inborn 
criminal tendency led him there by way of politics. Nor did 
anything about the Russian in the least suggest the socialist or 
anarchist. He seemed not to have the shghtest feeling for 
ideas and general social objectives. Nor was he altogether 
malicious, though a good many women in the camp called 
him “the devil,” from his appearance. This did not mean that 
at any minute he might not have been ready to do a murder in 
cold blood. His secret lay in his being nothing at all expheit, 
in his seeming to belong nowhere, to be living at some zero- 
point of incomprehensible neutrahty. Of all the people on the 
Damlayik he and Apothecary Knkor were certainly the most 
unsocial beings. The Russian, though he attracted him pro- 
foundly, depressed Bagradian. 

“I am glad I wasn’t wrong about you, Sarkis Kifikian. We 
have you, as much as anyone, to thank for our success on the 
fourteenth. Those machines of yours were a very good in- 
vention. I suppose you remembered something you’d learned 
at the Seminary? The Roman siege-methods, was that it?” 

“Haven't an idea, don’t know anything about it,” Kilikian 
grinned. , 

“If the Turks don’t venture another attack on the south, 
that’ll be your work, Kilikian.” 

This seemed to make some slight impression, but not a 
pleasant one. The Russian glanced with dead eyes at Gabriel. 
'Wc might have made those things far better.” 

Gabriel felt how inexorably the Russian was rejecting him. 
He began to be annoyed at his own weakness, which had 
nothing to oppose to this. “I suppose you got some experience 
of engineering in the boring-turrets of the Baku oil fields?” 

The Russian smirked at him mockingly. “Wasn’t even 
semi-skilled. I was nothing but an ordinary hand.” 

44 * 



Gabriel pushed some cigarettes across to him. “I’ve asked 
you here, Kilikian, to tell you some intentions of mine with 
r^rd to you. It’s to be hoped we’ll be getting a few days’ 
peace; but sooner or later they’re bound to start a fresh attack 
that will make all the others seem like child’s play. Now 
listen, my son, I intend to give you an extremely responsible 
post ’’ 

Kihkian emptied his tin mug to the very last drop, set it 
down reflectively. “That’s your look-out! You’re the com- 
mandant.” 

Meanwhile, the long “churls’ table” had begun to get ex- 
tremely noisy. These people had become unused to alcohol, 
and it soon went to their heads. And Juliette had given 
orders for a third jar to be unsealed. There were two very 
argumentative facuons — optimists and pessimists. Mukhtar 
Kebussyan had climbed up on the bench, where he stood sway- 
ing and rolling his bald head. He eyed them all with immense 
and vacant satisfaction. He was slyly mysterious: 

“We ought to negotiate. I’ve been mayor of Yoghonoluk for 
twelve years. . . . I’ve negotiated with the Turks, with the 
Kaimakam and the mudir . . . the Kaimakam was always 
most cordial ... I was punctual to the minute in paying in 
the communal bedel . . . and I used to be taken into his oflice 
— they all know me — the whole lot of them — ^Kaimakam, 
Mutessarif, Wall, Vizir, Sultan— they all knew I was Thomas 
Kebussyan! If I go along to negotiate, they won’t do anything 
to me, they know I’m a taxpayer . . . you aren’t taxpayers, 
there’s no comparison . . .” 

The smaller taxpayers, the village mayors and headmen of 
minor villages, were annoyed; they pulled Kebussyan down 
oS his perch. Chaush Nurhan shouted that he wouldn’t stand 
any more useless people in camp, eating up the supplies — 
he’d make the whole lot of them toe the line, whether they 
were seventy years old or not. Laughter. The tipsy row looked 
as though it might end in blows. But luckily Gabriel gave 

443 



orders that no more o£ his wine was to be distiibrned he- 
fore quickly leaving the table with Samuel Avakian, who 
had come to him to whisper some announcement 

Almost all the notables had retired. Ter Haigasun had stayed 
just half an hour. Aram Tomasian had soon followed him 
and gone back to his wife in the tent Gonzague and Juhette 
sat together. Hrand Oskaman was still in attendance on 
Juliette. He sat on the grass at her feet, and refused to take 
a place that had been vacated. But suddenly the silent httle 
schoolmaster scrambled up, with the aid of his musket, as 
though a snake had bitten him. He stared in horror at Julietta 
then he turned and left them stiffly. Oskaman had not had 
much to drink. And yet, before he had gone a few yards, he 
was telling himself that what he supposed he had just seen 
must have been an illusion, brought on by wine. It was not to 
be thought, it was somethmg altogether impossible, that a 
fair-haired palc-skinned goddess should sit rubbing an amorous 
knee against that of a shady adventurer, her subject, of whose 
origins no one knew anythmg. Yet for all his condusive reason- 
mg Oskanian’s heart was still beating hard, as he crossed the 
square before the altar. Juhette, grown suddenly restless, stood 
up to say that she must go in to see Hovsannah, neglected by 
her culpably all this time. 

The noisy quarrelling and spiteful laughter at the plebei^ 
table was getting more and more malicious, although all the 
men had long been drunk. Several uninvited people, most of 
them young, had come crowding in, and they heaped fuel 
on the flames. The sun sank.Tt had grown late. This exated 
christening-party cast wildly contending shadows across the 
grass. No doubt a brawl would have begun, had the sound of 
a long roll of drums, outside the Town Enclosure, not put 
a stop to it. Sudden quiet. “The munadirs,” said somebody, 
and someone else cried out: “Alarm!” The young men and the 
old were suddenly startled out of their quarrelsome forgetful- 
ness of realiues. They all went rushing oS excitedly, to take 

444 



didu* places in the sections. Pastor Aram was seen rushing in 
wild haste towards the Town Enclosure. Within a few minutes 
Three-Tent Square was entirely empty. “Alarm I” repeated 
Gonzague thoughtfully, and small gold points glinted m the 
quiet brown depths of his eyes. This Turkish attack was just 
what he wanted. This time it would probably end badly. 
Oughtn’t they to use tonight? 

Krikor could not manage to get up from table without help. 
Gonzague aided him. The old man’s agonized legs would not 
obey him. He would have collapsed, had not Maris carefully 
steered him home. Knkor, however, seemed scarcely to notice 
that he was in pain. It was nothing more than an unfortunate 
contretemps of nature. It took a very long time to get him to 
the government-hut. 

“Alarm?” he asked as indiiferently as though he had scarcely 
noticed such a trifle, and so forgotten it again. 

"Alarm!” Gonzague impressed it on his mind. “And this 
time It’s not going to be a joke.” 

The apothecary stopped. His breath failed at every fifth 
step. “What does it matter to me?” he breathlessly asked. “Do 
I belong to them ? Of course not! I belong to myself.” And his 
shaky hand traced a circle round him, to indicate the ex- 
clusive majesty of his ego-world. 

“If I don’t believe in evil, there isn’t any evil in the world 
. . . there isn’t any death unless I believe in it. . . . Let them 
kill me, I shan’t even notice it. . . . Anyone who can get to 
that point reshapes the world out of his mind.” 

He tried to raise his hands above his head. But m this he 
failed. Gonzague, whose whole nature continually prompted 
him rather to see a misfortune before it had happened than to 
let it happen before he saw it, had understood nothing of all 
this. And yet he politely asked, to please the apothecary: 
“Which of the ancient philosophers were you quoting then?” 

The mandarin’s mask stared indifferently out through gath- 
ering dusk. The white goatee twitched up and down. The 

445 



high hollow voice announced contemptuously: “That was s:ud 
by a philosopher whom no one but myself has ever quoted, 
or ever will quote — Krikor of Yoghonoluk.” 

Gabriel had ordered the great alarm without having been 
quite sure of immediate danger. This time it needed the dark 
to show him what a force the Turks had massed — ^just how 
large it was still impossible to determine — in the Armeman 
valley and across the Orontes plain. The combined regulars 
and sharpshooters seemed too numerous to be quartered in 
villages and so had to camp in the open. The wide half<irclc 
of their campHres extended from the ruins of Seleucia, almost 
as far as the farthest Armeman village, and nortliwards as far 
as Kebussiye. By degrees the spying patrols came in with 
astounding news. Turkish soldiers had sprung up suddenly 
out of nowhere: and not only soldiers but saptiehs and 
Chettehs, Moslems from all over the countryside, suddenly 
armed with bayonets and Mauser rifles. Their officers were 
forming them into detachments. The number of armed men 
could not be estimated. Fantasuc figures went from mouth to 
mouth. Yet, as Gabriel watched the huge half-circle of camp- 
fires and considered it, these figures seemed not so fantastic 
after all. Two things were certain. First, the Turkish com- 
mander had a strong enough force to besiege the Damlayik qr 
storm it from South Bastion to North Saddle. Secondly, they 
must feel so vastly superior as to have no need to protect their 
advance and attack suddenly. This open advance, intended 
(as indeed it did) to fill the Armenians with consternauon, 
pointed to a defimte “case,” which Bagradian had already 
provided against under the heading “general attack.” He had 
worked it out and used a defence manceuvre. Gabriel felt much 
calmer than he had before the two previous attacks, though 
this ume things looked hopeless for the mountam-folk. After 
the first alarm he sent his runners out to the various points of 
defence, to collect all the leaders and the free decads at his 

446 



headquarters. They were quite sober now, and all looked 
terrified. Gabriel, as he was empowered constitutionally to do, 
took over full control of the camp for the period of battle. He 
gave orders that all freshly killed meat was to be got ready 
during the night. Two hours before daybreak the trenches 
must be fully provisioned. Further, whatever wine or brandy 
was sail available in the camp must be shared out among the 
fighters. He placed all the remaining ten-litre jars on Three- 
Tent Square at their disposal. (This gift was later to cause 
the myth of Bagradian’s inexhaustible store of supplies.) 

When decads, group leaders, and the people of the reserve 
had all assembled, Gabriel made a short speech. He explained 
the kind of battle they must expect, and kept nothing back. 
He said: “By all human reckomngs we have only the choice 
between two deaths, between easy death in battle, or a mean 
and terrible death by massacre. If we realize this quite clearly 
— ^if we are men enough to make up our minds quite coolly to 
choose the first, decent death in the field, then perhaps there’ll 
be a miracle, and we shan’t have to die. . . . But only then, 
brothers!” 

A new division for the case of a general attack was formed. 
Cliaush Nurhan, the Lion, was given command of the North 
Saddle. A further change of command was that Gabriel en- 
trusted Kihkian, as he had promised to do a few hours pre- 
viously, with the important sector above the ilex gully. Two 
entirely new fighting groups were constituted, a mobile guard 
and a band of komitajis. For the last Nurhan and Bagradian, 
remembering the guerrilla troops in the Balkan war, picked 
out about a hundred of the most determined men among the 
decads, the best shots and most expert climbers. They were 
to disperse over the whole valley side of the Damlayik and 
form ambuscades along the slopes, in tree-tops, behind rocks 
and bushes, in hollows and folds of the ground. They were 
to let the attacking Turkish columns conje on undisturbed, 
then suddenly open fire on them from behind, if possible from 

447 



fcveral points at once, without sparing munitions. Eada 
konutaji was served out with twelve magazines, that is to say 
sixty cartridges, a lavish ration under the circumstances. But 
this time Bagradian did not propose to stint muniuons, since 
the coming battle would doubtless bring the final deasion, 
and he saw no reason for trying to economize bullets. Only a 
few remnants of the original cartridges, and those they had 
plundered, or else refilled, still remained in the stores. In his 
simple, logical way he explained their duties to the sharp- 
shooters, so that each of these youngsters understood exaedy 
what was wanted. The chief rule was still “a dead man for 
every bullet.” When the komitajis had been formed, the mobile 
guard was picked out from among the decads. Gabriel reduced 
the garrison in the South Bastion, whose strong defence works 
made it an almost impregnable position, to only the most neces- 
sary fighters. The reservists filled in the gaps. This released 
about one hundred and fifty rifles for his mobile guard, which 
he led in person, and with which he would attack in any place 
where the lines seemed menaced. Most of these storm troops 
were mounted on the camp donkeys. Donkeys in these parts are 
not as slow-footed and obstinate as elsewhere, but will take any 
pace. The two groups of the cohort of youth, the orderlies and 
the section of scouts, had always to keep at the heels of the 
guard, so that widely extended communications between all 
sections and the command might never be broken. 

Such were the main outhnes of this ordre de batmlle, already 
worked out by Gabriel to meet the case of general attack. 
He had prepared it all with the greatest calm, during the first 
two hours of the night. Lastly he summoned the whole re- 
serve. It was ordered to vacate the Town Enclosure by sun- 
rise. One half of it was destined to stand by for action m the 
various sectors, the other took up its position on the long 
reaches of the high plateau. These strips of ground, which in 
many places, as for instance before the ilex gully sector, were 
only about a thousand feet wide, formed a very dangerous 

448 



zone. Here only a few redoubts, or rather a few loosely piled 
up stones, defended the Town Enclosure from assault. When 
Gabriel had also addressed the reserve, and made them realize 
themselves as the filial barrier against the worst horrors of rape 
and child-slaughter, Nurhan the Lion sounded the bugle-call. 
Its fierce stutter managed to shape out a few notes of the 
Turkish “lights out.” This was the order to get to sleep. 

Gabriel went to look at the howitzers. He mtended to 
spend the night adjusting them. With Nurhan’s help he had 
managed to train a few of the more intelhgent men for artil- 
lery duty. The last two scouts were in before midnight. They 
reported nothing not known already. The only fresh details 
they could give was that the half-moon flag had been hoisted 
over Villa Bagradian, that many horses were tethered in a 
line along the courtyard, and that officers kept coming in and 
out. It was therefore clear that the Turks had made the 
villa their headquarters. Gabriel waited for the late rising 
of the moon. Then, with compasses, he carefully began to 
mark out distances on his map, and to draw calculations. A 
big, inflated-looking full moon gave enough light to enable 
him to sight an auxiliary mark and adjust his guns by it. The 
men of the battery were instructed to drag the lockers close 
up to each gun. There were still five shrapnel and twenty- 
three grenades in the boxes. Gabriel had half these shells 
placed in a row behind the guns. He went from one to the 
other and set the fuse with his clamping-key, by the light of 
his electric torch. Iskuhi appeared as he was doing it. At first 
he did not notice she was there. She called to him sofdy. He 
took her hand, and led her far away from the gun, till they 
were alone. They sat down under an arbutus bush; it was 
covered all over with red berries, which, in the moonlight, 
had the dead look of drops of seahng-wax. 

Iskuhi’s voice came subdued and hesitant: “I only wanted to 
ask you whether it would disturb you too much i£ tomorrow 
I stayed somewhere near you.” 

449 . 



“There’s nothing in the world that does me so much good 
as to have you near me, Iskuhi.” 

Gabriel bent close over Iskuhi to look far down into her 
eyes, which met his ardently. An odd thought sped across his 
mind. This feeling which drew them together might not be 
love, at least not love in the ordinary meaning of the word, 
not the kind of love which had bound him to Juliette, but 
something very much greater, yet less than love. It heightened 
all his faculties immeasurably, made him celestially happy, 
without any desire diverting that happiness. It may have been 
the unknown love of the same blood, which quickened him 
like a mystic spring, welling up m Iskuhi ’s eyes; not the wish 
to be joined in future, but the utter certainty of having been 
so in the past. His eyes smiled into hers. 

“I have no sense of death, Iskuhi. It’s mad, but I simply 
can’t make myself think that this time tomorrow I mayn’t still 
be alive. Perhaps it isn’t a bad omen. What do you feel?” 

“Death’s sure to come anyway, Gabriel. There isn’t any other 
way out for us, is there?” 

He did not extract their double meaning from her words. 
An incredibly hght assurance sprang up within him. “One 
oughtn’t to look too far ahead, Iskuhi. I’ll think of nothing 
but tomorrow. I don’t even think of tomorrow night. Do you 
know I’m looking forward to the morning!” 

Iskuhi stood up to go back to her tent. “I only wanted to 
ask you to promise me something, Gabriel. Something quite 
obvious. If things get so that there’s no more hope, please 
shoot me and then yourself. It’s the best solution. I can’t live 
without you. And I shouldn’t like you to go on living without 
me — not a second! So may I still stay somewhere near you 
tomorrow, please?” 

No! She must give him her word not to leave her tent dur- 
mg the fighung. But, in exchange, he promised that if things 
got desperate he would either fetch or have her sent for, and 
kill them both. He smiled as he was promising this, since in- 

450 



(jeed nothing in his heart felt the slightest prescience of an 
end. Therefore he did not fear in the least for Stephan, or 
Juliette. Yet, as he again took up his work on the guns, he 
found himself surprised at his own assurance, which the 
fiercest reality all round him, in a threatening half-moon of 
fire, seemed so contemptuously to disprove. 

The Kaimakam, the yus-bashi from Antakiya, the red-haired 
mudir, the battahon commandant of the four companies sent 
from Aleppo, and two other officers sat that evening in the 
selamlik of Villa Bagradian, holding a council of war. That 
reception-room was as brilliant with candlelight as it had 
been when Juliette received notables. Orderlies cleared away 
the meal, which these officers had eaten in her salon. Bugle- 
calls sounded outside the windows, and all the pother of rest- 
ing and victualling soldiers. Since with these Armenian devils 
you never knew, the Kaimakam had ordered a guard for head- 
quarters. It was now engaged in setting up its camp, laying 
waste the park, orchard, and vegetable garden in the process. 

This council had lasted a fairly long time without showing 
signs of complete agreement. They were discussing an im- 
portant matter. Would it, or would it not, be really advisable 
to begin operations against the Damlayik tomorrow at sup- 
rise, as arranged? The Kaimakam with the misanthropic 
complexion, the dark-brown pouches under his eyes, was the 
hesitant, dilatory member of this discussion. He defended 
his lack of resolution by msisting that, though at the Wall’s 
request the general in Aleppo had sent them a full infantry 
battalion, he had failed in his promise of mountain artillery 
and machine-guns. The Kolagasi (stafE captain) from Aleppo 
explained this by informing them that such arms had all be^ 
cleared out of Syria, with the transferred divisions to which 
they belonged, and that in all Aleppo there was not so much 
as a single machine-gun. Would it not, demanded the 
Kaimakam, be better not to attack for the next few days and 

45 * 



send an urgent telegram to His Excellency }emal Padia, beg* 
£^g him to assign them the weapons they needed? The officers 
considered this impossible. Such direct appeals were likely to 
irritate the incalculable Jemal, and might even move him to 
counter-measures. 

The yus-bashi from Antakiya pushed back his chair and 
took out a sheet of paper. His fingers shook, less from excite- 
ment than because he was a chain-smoker. “Effendilerl” His 
voice was thin and morose. “If we’re going to wait about for 
machine-guns and mountain-artillery, the best thmg we can 
do is to winter here. The army in the field has so few of them 
that our request would simply be ridiculous. May I again 
remind the Kaimakam of the exact strength of our attacking 
force?" 

Toneiessly he read out his ^ures: “Four companies from 
Aleppo: say a thousand men. Two companies from Alcxan- 
dretta: five hundred men. The strengthened garrison from 
Antakiya: four hundred and fifty men. That means nearly 
two thousand rifles of trained infantry. Why, regiments at the 
front can’t be nearly as strongl Further— the second line: four 
hundred sapuehs from Aleppo, three hundred saptiehs from 
our own kazah, four hundred chettehs from the north— that’s 
another eleven hundred men. And, besides all that, there’s 
our third line, of two thousand Moslems from the villages; 
whom we’ve armed. So that altogether we shall attack with 
a force of about five thousand rifles. . . .’’ 

Here the yus-bashi stopped to gulp down a small cup of 
coffee and light a fresh cigarme. Somebody used the pause 
to interrupt him: 

“Don’t forget the Armenians have two howitzers.” 

The major’s hatchet face looked almost animated; his yel- 
lowish forehead began to gjisten. “That artillery is completdy 
useless. First, they have no ammunition. Second, nobody 
knows how to use the things. Third, we shall get hold of them 
very quckly again.’’ 


45 » 



The Kaimakam, who, bored or weary, had sunk far back in 
his chair, raised heavy eyes. "Don’t underrate this Bagradian 
fellow, Yus-Bashi. I’ve only seen the man once, in a bath. 
But he behaved, with unusual insolence.” 

The young freckled mudir with the carefully manicured 
nails interposed reproachfully: “It was a great mistake on the 
part of the military authorities not to have called him up. 
He’s in the reserve. I know for a fact that Bagradian volun- 
teered several times. Without him the coast would be per- 
fectly quiet and normal.” 

The major cut short these reflections: “Bagradian thisi 
Bagradian that! Such civilians aren’t so very important. I went 
up yesterday and reconnoitred the Damlayik ]ust to see for 
myself what the position was. They’re a ragged-looking crew. 
Their trenches seemed to me to be quite primitive. At a 
generous estimate they’ve got between four and five hundred 
rifles. We should have to spit in our own faces if we hadn’t 
cleared them out by midday.” 

“We certainly should, Yus-Bashi,” agreed the Kaimakam. 
“But any animal, even the smallest, gets ferocious when it’s 
lighting for its life.” 

The Kolagasi from Aleppo most cxplicidy endorsed the 
major’s view. He fully hoped that within two days he would, 
be out of this prmutive neighbourhood and back in the pleas- 
ant town of Aleppo. 

Smce the oflicers all seemed so confident, the Kaimakam 
dismissed the sitting with a yawn: “Well, then — ^you guarantee 
success, Yus-Bashi?” 

That draconian officer poured swaths of smoke out of his 
nostrils. “One can guarantee nothing in any military enter- 
prise. I must reject the word guarantee. I can only say that 
I don’t want to go on living if the Armenian camp isn’t 
liquidated by this time tomorrow.” 

Upon which the lolling Kaimakam heavily rose. “Well, let’s 
get to bed.” 


453 



But that night the potentate’s sleep was not of the soundest. 
He had taken up his quarters in Juliette’s room. It was still 
saturated with perfume from the many flasks of scent that 
had been broken in it. They enmeshed the slumbering dyspep- 
tic in such cloying and irritating nightmares that his rest was 
broken by several sleepless hours. 

His awakening was no better than his sleep had been. Scarcely 
had the light begun to break when he started up to the sound 
of a terrific explosion. He rushed, half-dressed, outside the 
house. The destrucuon was great. The shell had dropped 
sheer in front of the steps. The fragments of every window in 
the whole house strewed the ground. The gust of the shell 
had torn a wing of the front door off its hinges and flung it 
back into the hallway. Three deep breaches gaped in the brick- 
work, and iron shards stuck up everywhere out of the ground. 
But worst of all was the sight of the Aleppo staff officer. 
That unfortunate had been designed by fate to be making 
his way out of the house at the very instant of the explosion. 
Now he sat huddled against the wall. His blue eyes looked 
vacantly childish. He breathed heavily, seemed lost in some 
dreamy past. A splinter had skimmed all the flesh off his right 
shoulder, another wounded his left hip. The yus-bashi was 
assisting him. It looked as though he were tellmg hun rather 
sharply not to give way so comfortably to his wound. But 
the Kolagasi was insubordinate. He paid no attention what- 
ever and lurched over, slowly, on to his side. The yus-bashi 
turned away angrily and bellowed at the frightened men not 
to stand about there with their mouths open, but go along 
and fetch the doctor and an ambulance. It was not so easy. 
The surgeon was attached to the third company in Bitias. The 
major had the wounded Kolagasi carried upstairs into Ste- 
phan’s bedroom and deposited on Stephan’s bed. He returned 
to consciousness, but only to implore the major not to leave 
him until his wound had been dressed. The Kaimakam, by 

454 



nature a confirmed civilian, to whom bloodshed was as 
repugnant in practice as it frequently seemed desirable in 
theory, crept into the cellar as though by accident — down the 
dark cool stairs. Gabriel’s bombardment continued. Another 
shell had just come crashing into the orchard. 

It was more than ironic fate which had directed the trajec- 
tory of the first straight to Bagradian’s own front door, check- 
mating the battalion commander. Perhaps it was not mere 
accident, but a living witness to the fact that God is not in- 
variably on the side of the biggest battalion. In any case this 
laming of the command delayed the attack by over an hour. 
The Turks, in the orchards and vineyards, who had already 
disposed themselves in extended order to advance, were kept 
back. The Armenian swine seemed to have known what to 
aim at, and have expert gunners! And, though the next 
eight shells were not quite so lucky, the valley was at least wide 
enough to ensure that, wherever they might drop, shrapnel 
and grenades caused panic. Three houses in Bitias, Aziz, and 
Yoghonoluk were set alight. A detachment of encamped 
saptiehs, drinking morning coffee out of tin mugs, sustained 
heavy losses from a grenade. Leaving three dead and many 
wounded, these upholders of law and order retired for ever 
from the engagement, without having fired a single shot. 

This howitzer bombardment at least gave the results erf- 
visaged by Gabrid, though he got no clear perception of his 
success. It disorganized the Turkish plan of attack. The morale 
of the new civil population was so disastrously affected by it 
that shoals of Turkish women had begun already to take flight 
in the direction of the Orontes plain. Not least was the paraly- 
sis of the leadership, which lasted a considerable time. Not 
till long after the howitzers had ceased their fire, did lines 
of riflemen summon enough courage to advance and disappear 
into the woods on the lowest slopes of Musa Dagh. For an 
instant Bagradian reproached himself with not having pos- 
sessed enough audacity to post at least the four hundred men 

4S5 



of his first defence, the half of his decads and komitaji^ here 
and there along these lines of advance, and so molest the 
attack before it had time to develop properly. But in any case 
the hundred komitajis already enrolled had disposed them- 
selves halfway up the hdight so skilfully, and were fired with 
such mad, clear-headed audacity, that they wrought more 
damage and confusion among the groups which came pant- 
ing past them than any open attack could have achieved. 
Twice, three times, their invisible cross-fire hurled these 
companies, engaged in toihng their way through thickets, 
wildly apart, and fully dispersed them. Cut off from their 
leaders, and expecting death at any instant, these groups went 
rushing down the slopes. It was not cowardice. Defence was 
impossible. After which unsuccessful attempt there was noth- 
ing left for the major hut to rally his companies on the line 
of the lowest slope, order a short rest, and serve out rations. 
Meanwhile the komitajis were undisturbed as they gathered 
up the rifles and cartridge-belts from dead or wounded, and 
carried them off behind their hnes. 

The Kaimakam, who had come out to see the command, 
caustically inquired of the yus-bashi; “Are you going to repeat 
your tactic? If you do, it doesn’t look as if we’d ever get up 
the mountain.” 

That irate major’s face turned coffee-coloured. He began to 
bellow at the Kaimakam; “Take over the command yourself if 
you like! It’s your responsibility far more than mine." 

The Kaimakam perceived that one must be careful in deal- 
ing with this touchy ofiicer. This was not the moment at which 
to quarrel. He shnigged, in his usual sleepy way. “You’re 
quite right. It’s my responsibility. But don’t forget. Major, that 
you’ll be responsible to me. If there’s another fiasco we shall 
botli of us have to take the consequences, you just as much 
as I.” 

This was so true that the major had nothing more to say. 
Since the highest quarters, the Wali, the Minister of War, had 

456 



liad their atteadon drawa to Musa Dagh, a third failure would 
mean a court mardal for the major. It would probably handle 
him even worse than it had his rosy-cheeked predecessor. He 
and the Kaimakam were linked together for good or ill. 
He must be kept in with. He grunted a pacific remark and set 
to work again. The compamcs m the north were ordered to 
advance immediately agamst the Armenian trenches along the 
Saddle. The South Bastion along the steeper ridge was not 
to be meddled with, since neither the major nor his effeedves 
were anxious for another avalanche. The major called his 
ofBcers together and ordered them to tdl their platoons that 
any man who turned back in the next advance would be 
shot down without mercy. A long line of saptiehs and 
chettehs, detailed especially for this executioner’s work, were 
posted along the hollows of the fore-slope. They received 
stringent orders to open fire on retreating infantry. Neither 
sapuehs nor sharpshooters had any objection to the duty. At 
the same time the major advanced a third, very long line of 
armed villagers (they even mcluded a few women) into the 
region of apricot orchards and vines. The companies’ terror 
of the major’s drastic orders had its effects. The men, driven 
on by panic, came rushing up the steep slopes. They did not 
so much as dare to get second wind. They shut their eyes and 
stormed through the komitajis’ fire. The afternoon was well 
over by the ume the three platoons, under gruelling bullets 
from above, managed to set foot on the upper slopes, and dig 
themselves in, as best they might, with their infantry spades, 
under the Armenian positions, or else take cover behind 
rocks, heaps of rubble, or folds in the ground. By this heroic 
advance between two fires, the major’s troops had obtained 
their first outstanding success. That officer, drunk with the lust 
of battle, waving his sword, led on fresh hnes to the assault 
These, too, succeeded, in implanting themselves below the 
Armenian trenches, and so emending the line of attack. Such 
successes inspired the Turkish souL They opened wild fire 

457 



along the new line, on every attacking point. At first it mat> 
tcred nothing to the major whether his bullets found a mark. 
For two whole hours the ears and hearts of these Armemans 
were to be so basted into terror that the dregs of their courage 
should ebb away. They were also to be shown that the Turkish 
state had enough bullets at its disposal to keep the fire as hot as 
ever for the next three days. The defenders crouched back, 
paralysed, in their trenches, letting this dense hailstorm of 
bullets patter and spin above their heads. The worst of it 
was that the infantry nearest the Town Enclosure sent un- 
limited shot among the log huts, so that from time to time 
both dum-dum and ordinary nfle-bullets caused terrible 
wounds among the inhabitants. Ter Haigasun therefore gave 
orders for the whole enclosure to be vacated, and for non- 
combatants to retire towards the sea and among the rocks. 

During this long frenzy of munition wasting, the major 
advanced one after another, his company reserves, his saptiehs, 
and last of all his armed peasants, all led by officers, so that 
overwhelmingly superior numbers, when at last he stormed, 
might have their effect in cvcr-incrcasing lines of men. The 
second, third, fourth lines of attack were stationed at fairly 
wide intervals behind the front. When these shaken and excited 
troops, emerging from the komitajis’ cross-fire, had come on 
bellowing up the slopes, the major ordered his first line to 
attack The Armenians, seasoned by now in the art of re- 
pelling such wide advances, fired down from their, as a rule 
higher, positions and calmly dispersed the attacking waves. 
Quickly as these lines, one after another, were advanced, 
they broke each time, severely handicapped by the roughness 
of this mountain terrain, far from the Armenian trenches. In 
spite of superior numbers and unlimited supplies of ammuni- 
tion the Moslems could not manage till almost nighfall to 
advance one pace on any point of attack. The Armenians still 
found It comparatively easy to repel them without too many 
losses, owing to the fact that their defences had been so skil* 

458 



tuUy contrived. Here and there their trenches formed sharp 
angies, so that the oncommg Turks had to take both front 
and flank Are. Added to which the komitajis, who suddenly 
on this or that part of the line spattered the reserves with a 
quick and deadly rain of bullets, disconcerted these regulars. 
The compulsory valour of these attacks, all equally vain, had 
already cost the major as many men as the last defeat of the 
poor bimbashi, whose losses had brought him such dire dis* 
grace. But the yus-bashi was made of sterner stuff. He would 
not retire. Again and again he put himself at the head of his 
men, avoiding death a hundred times, by virtue of that mirac- 
ulous law which seems to protect all real valour in leadership. 
He usually stayed with the ilex-gully sector, since gradually it 
had grown apparent that this was the weakest part of the 
defence. Gabrid, thanks to his mobile guard, had still control 
of all the threads. “Three hours more,” he thought, “and it’ll 
be dark.” The guard had again and again come galloping up 
to reinforce a threatened sector, hold unsteady trenches, fiU 
up the menaced gap between two divisions, and relieve an 
exhausted decad. Now, however, Gabriel lay fagged out, 
white, breathless as a corpse, he could not tell where, and End- 
ing it hard to regain his strength. Avakian sat beside him, and 
about twelve orderhes of the cohort of youth awaited his 
orders. Haik was one of them. Not Stephan. Messages came in’' 
every minute. Mostly they came from the North Saddle, which 
till now had been havmg an easy day. But at about this time 
the Turks seemed to change their intention and prepare a big 
coup against the north. Chaush Nurhan’s messages were more 
and more anxiously framed. Not only the major but the whole 
staff of other officers had come up from behind cover on to the 
counter-slope. He had recognized them quite plainly through 
his field-glass. Bagradian intended to use the guard, his last 
defence, as sparingly as he possibly could, and not let himself 
be imposed upon by the inexperience of individual section 
leaders. This north section was by far the best defended posi- 

459 



tbn, and he could see no reason for sending up reinforce- 
ments into this particular system of his defence, before the 
real fight had even begun. It seemed far more important to 
Gabriel to stay continually m the vicinity of the ilex-gully 
sector, by far the most menaced, and do his best to avert 
disaster there. So there he lay, with his eyes shut, and seemed 
not to heed the continual messages from the north ridge. 
“Only two and a half hours more of it,” his thoughts kept 
whispering. A lull had set in. The firing died down. Gabriel 
let exhaustion overwhelm him. It may have been this mental 
and physical cnfeeblement which caused hun to fall into the 
major’s trap. 

Sharp echoes of the fight sounded all along the “Riviera.” 
Some acoustic trick made the ping and clatter of the bullets 
seem to whip the ground all round Gonzague and Juhette. 
They got the sensation of sitting in the very midst of a battle, 
although really it was a good way off. Juliette kept tight hold 
of Gonzague’s hand. He listened. The whole of him seemed 
to be listenmg. He sat very excited, and very still. 

“I think It’s coming nearer all round. At least, that’s what 
it sounds like.” 

Juliette said nothing. The hissing din was so fantastically 
strange that she seemed not to understand and, so far, scarcely, 
to have heard it. Gonzague only bent shghtly forward, to get 
a better view of the surf as it leapt round the rocks many feet 
below. The sea today was unusually rough: its distant anger 
mingled with the din of the rifles. Mans pointed south, along 
the coast. “We ought to have made up our minds sooner, 
Juhette. By now you should have been sitting quite peacefully 
in the manager’s house, beside the alcohol factory.” 

She shivered. Her bps opened to speak, but she took a long 
time to find any voice; she seemed to have lost it. “The ship 
leaves on the twenty-sixth. This is only the twenty-third 
I’ve still got three days.” 



yes”— lie calmed her down with the tenderest for- 
bearance— “you’ve got three days. ... I won’t deprive you of 
one of them ... if others don’t.” 

“Oh, Gonzague, I feel so strange, so incomprehensible . . .” 
Her voice died halfway through the sentence. There seemed 
no object in trying to describe a state of mind which was so 
entirely unfamiliar. It was like drawing something soft and 
very vulnerable out of its protective chrysalis by the very part 
that felt most coldly exposed. All her hmbs had a cold life 
of their own, scarcely in touch with her general consciousness. 
She could, she felt, regretfully take off her arms and legs at 
any minute and lock them up m a trunk. Ages ago, when she 
inhabited her bright and reasoned world, Juliette would not 
have remained inactive. “I must have something the matter 
with me” would have been her instantaneous reaction, and so 
she would, no doubt, have taken her temperature. Now she 
could only sit and wonder how it was that her appalling situa- 
tion should at the same time feel so right, so cotnfortable. As 
she thought this, she twice repeated: “Incomprehensible . . .” 

“Poor juhette. I understand exactly. You’ve lost yourself — 
first for fifteen years, and now for the last twenty-four days. 
Now you can’t find either the sham Juliette or the real one. 
You sec, I don’t belong anywhere. I’m not Armenian or French 
or Greek, or even American; I’m really and truly nothing, so 
I’m free. You’ll find me very easy to be with. But you must 
cut loose.” 

She stared, not understanding a word he said to her. The 
rifle-fire was nearing the climax of its excitement. Impossible 
to sit quietly in one place. Gonzague helped her to her feet. 
She stumbled about as though she were dazed. 

He seemed to get restless. “We must think what to do, 
Juliette. That doesn’t sound very reassuring. What are your 
plans?” 

She half completed the gesture of putting her hands up to 
her ears. “I’m tired. I want to lie down.” 

461 



“That’s quite impossible, Juliette. Just listen. They may 
break through at any minute. I suggest we move away from 
her^ and wait farther down, to see what’s happened.” 

She shook her head stubbornly. “No. I’d rather go back to 
the tent.” 

He clasped her hips, and gently tried to draw her his way. 
“Don’t be annoyed, Juliette. But you know it’s really abso- 
lutely necessary to get this thing straight in your mind. In the 
next half-hour the Turks may be in the Town Enclosure. 
And Gabriel Bagradian? How do you know he’s still alive?" 

The howling and crackling all round them seemed to rein- 
force Gonzague’s fears. But Juliette suddenly started out of 
her torpor to all her old energy and decisiveness. 

“I want to see Stephan. I want Stephan here, with mel” she 
cried out with almost angry vehemence. 

Her child’s name rent a horrible fog of unreality which bad 
crept upon her from every side. Her maternity had become a 
well-built house— Its walls impenetrable, strong enough to keep 
out the world. She seized Gonzague with both hands and 
pushed him impatiently. “Go and bring Stephan to me at 
once, you hear. . . . Please don’t lose any time. Find him. FIl 
wait! I’ll wait!” 

For a second he thought it over. Gallantly he suppressed 
every objection, and bent his head. “All right, juhette. I’ll do. 
whatever I can to hunt up the boy. And as fast as I can. I 
won’t keep you waiting long.” 

And actually, within half an hour, Gonzague Mans had 
come back with a savage and perspiring Stephan, who came 
reluctantly at his heels. Juliette threw herself on her son and 
hugged him, shaken with dry sobs. He was so tired that, the 
minute they all sat down, he slept. 

Gabriel the scholar, the bel esprit, had fully proved that he had 
the ability to lead men. The threat of death had forced it to 
the surface. Acknowledged and professional generals have 

462 



often made the mistake that he now was guilty of— they have 
allowed their subjective preference for a certain, closely studied 
part of their plan unduly to influence their decisions. So that 
Gabriel, prejudiced in favour of the main achievement of his 
great scheme of defence, let himself delay too long before at 
last he heeded Chaush Nurhan’s messages, which had ended 
as desperate cries for help. Since the Turks neither renewed 
their attack in the ilex gully, nor at any other of the whole 
circle of possible attacking-points round the mountain, since 
rifle-fire died down on all sides, to begin again with unex- 
pected ferocity in the north, it began to look as if the enemy 
would attempt a break-through on the Saddle, with the whole 
strength of his far more numerous effectives. For that reason 
Gabriel drew together his decads, dispersed over the whole 
length of the mountain-slope, and led them northwards, to 
await the onslaught of the Turks in the second-line trench, 
among the rock barricades. Gabriel expected it any minute, 
since the fire kept growing in intensity and dusk by now had 
already gathered. (No one but himself could man the howitz- 
ers, so they had to be left to stand unused.) 

Sarkis Kilikian, a section leader above the ilex gully, had 
behaved most gallantly all that day and beaten back five at- 
tacks. For a time it looked as though the extended lines of 
Turks, notwithstanding all their losses at that one point, would 
not try to force their break-through at any other, since this, 
after all, was the key position, which led straight into the heart 
of the camp. Since in the first few hours of today’s fighting 
Gabriel still had not been certain that the Russian would man- 
age to hold out, he had spent a good deal of the day in and 
around the ilex-gully sections, and several times had attacked 
with the decads, falling on the flanks of the Turks. Sarkis 
Kilikian’s task had been anything but easy. The main trench 
extended only the length of a fairly long strip of ground; the 
trenches of the flank defence were not very favourably placed, 
and were moreover several hundred paces away from the next 

463 



sector. And these gaps wore not filled up, as were those between 
most of the other attacking'points, by steep descents, walls of 
rock, or such thick undergrowth as made them impossible to 
negotiate. The Russian commanded a comparatively small 
force of eight dccads, and it was set fairly wide apart, con- 
sidcnng the character of the terrain. Yet he had got through 
the day without too many losses; only two dead and six 
wounded. Something of Kihkian’s personahty, his cadaverous 
peace, his indifference, seemed to have gone over into his men. 
Whenever the Turks began to attack, these defenders aimed 
with a deliberauon for which “bored” seems the only word. 
They felt, it seemed, equally at home in life or death, so that 
really it made very little difference which of these two places 
of sojourn they inhabited in the immediate future. As Kilikian 
levelled his gun, he was careful not to let go out one of the cx^ 
cellent cigarettes of which Bagradian had made him the pres' 
ent of a box. Now, after so many blood-smeared hours, he 
stood resting his shrunken body against the parapet, and stared 
down the slope below the trench, strewn about with tree trunks 
and branches, shrubs and dwarf-pines, that fell sheer in a steep 
declivity to the actual mouth of the ilex gully, which the enemy 
occupied. Gabriel had, of course, in the first few days caused 
the edge of the camp to be cleared of tall trees. Kilikian’s 
youthful death’s-head never moved. His impressive agate eyej 
betrayed the supreme faculty of reducing life to a minimum of 
action. In his looted uniform the Russian, with his sloping 
shoulders and figure slender as a girl’s, accentuated still fur- 
ther by a very tighdy drawn belt, looked like a dapper ofScer. 
He said nothing at all to the men beside him, who were 
equally silent. Their eyes kept straying towards the shadows 
of trees and shrubs, which from second to second lengthened 
and narrowed out, became golden, secretively alive. Every Ar- 
menian on the Damlayik, except perhaps Krikor and Kilikian, 
had his mind full of one thought only, of the same thought as 
Gabriel Bagradian; “Only two more hours, and then the sun 



will be down.” From the north came a burst otrifle-fire. Down 
here, wood and mountain might have been in the deepest 
peace. Many of these exhausted men were closing their eyes. 
They had the strange sensation that stolen sleep would some- 
how drive time on more quickly into the arms of rescuing 
darkness. There were more and more sleepers. Till at last 
scarcely one man of those who held these trenches was still 
awake. Only the dead, polished eyes of Sarkis Kilikian, their 
leader, stared fixedly at the dark wooded edge of the ilex gully. 
What happened in the next few minutes must be classed as 
one of those enigmas which no explanation explains or moti- 
vates. The streak of incomprehensible lethargy in Kilikian, that 
trait in him which the boy of eleven, lying under his mother 
while she bled to death, had already begun to build up m 
himself as protection against too great an intensity of suffer- 
ing, might at a pinch be made responsible. In any case he 
never moved, nor did his eyes change their expression, when 
single attacking infantrymen, followed httle by little by whole 
swarms of them, began to emerge at the edge of the wood. 
Not a shot announced the attack. The Turks seemed too timid 
to want to detach themselves from the jagged edge of the ilex 
gully. They waited uneasily for the defenders to let off their 
nfies. Since that did not happen, they thrust forward — there 
were at least three hundred of them— ran on and again waited, 
ducking down behind every obstacle, for the Armenian fire. 
Some of the men in the trench were still asleep. Others seized 
their guns and blmked at the noiseless, stealthy picture be- 
neath them. At this instant the liquid glow of sunset intensi- 
fied, and burst into a thousand gold sequins and splinters, 'fhe 
half-moons on the officers’ kepis glittered. Strangely enough 
they did not wear trench caps in this campaign. The Arme- 
nians, dazed with sunset brilliance, lifted their rifles and 
stared at Kilikian, awaiting his orders. Then came the inex- 
plicable. Instead of, as he had before, quiedy signing to them 
to aim, deciding how near the Turks were to come, and then 

465 



setting his whistle to his hps, the Rtissian, reflective and de* 
liberate, chmbed out of the trench. This looked so like an 
order that, half in bewildered exhaustion, half in blind trust 
in the unknown intention of their leader, one after another 
swung over the parapet. The Turks, who had stalked their 
way forward to within fifty paces, started, and flung themselves 
down. Their hearts stood still. 

They were expecting a fierce attack. But Sarkis Kihkian 
quietly stood in front of the centre trench, not going either on 
or back, not shouting any word of command. Three hundred 
Mauser rifles opened a gruelling qmck fire on the rigid human 
targets above them, who stood out black against the glittering 
sunset. In a few seconds a third of the garrison of this sector 
were crouching, with groans and howls of pain on the blood- 
soaked earth of Musa Dagh. Sarkis Kilikian stood on, in 
thoughtful surprise, his hands in his pockets. The Turkish 
bullets seemed to avoid him, as though fate considered that to 
put an end to this unique destiny b^y a simple death in the 
field would be far too banal a proceeding. When at last he 
raised his hand and shouted something to his riflemen, it was 
much too late. He was swept along m the general flight of 
what still remained of the garrison, a flight which only turned 
and collected itself half-way to the stone barricades. These were 
four fairly oblong heaps of piled-up stones, almost outside the 
Town Enclosure. Before the fugitives reached their cover, they 
left twenty-three dead and wounded behind them. The Turk- 
ish infantry, shouting indescribable war-cries, took possession 
of the vacated trenches. Their reserve crowded m after them, 
the saptiehs, the chettchs, and last the armed villagers. A fair 
number of bellicose Moslem women had followed their men. 
When these women, hidden behind the trees of the ilex gully, 
saw the success of the Turkish advance, they broke forth, like 
frenzied ma;nads, from the wood, took each other’s hands, 
formed a chain, while from their throats came a long, shrill 
sound unhke any other, the zilgith, the ancient battle^ry of 

466 



the vromen of Islam. This raking scream let loose the devil in 
the men. They, as their bold aeed instructs them, had ceased 
to care for life or death; they dashed in a mad gallop against 
the wretched heaps of stone, without firing another shot, with 
fixed bayonets. 

In this disaster several bits of isolated luck came to the aid 
of the Armenians. As they saw the Turks bayonet their 
wounded and tread them mto the ground with their army 
boots, the whole watchful, frigid alertness of their unavoidable 
destiny came upon them again. They lay stiffly behind their 
cover and aimed quiedy, with all their accustomed deadly cer- 
tainty. The Turks had the last, dazzling sun in their faces, 
the Armenians at their backs. Another advantage in misfor- 
tune was the confusion arising from the circumstance that at- 
tackeis before the neighbouring sectors, running past their 
own officers, left their posts and, drunk with victory, swarmed 
towards the breach. Therefore defenders also left their trenches 
and crowded, left and right, towards the danger-spot. The con- 
sequence was a confused hand-to-hand struggle, in which 
fnend and foe (many Armenians were wearing plundered 
Turkish uniform) got mixed in together unrecognizably. It 
was a long time, and many men had to lose their hves, brfore 
the enemies sorted themselves out, and superior numbers suc- 
ceeded in driving back the Armenians towards the Town En-' 
closure. Bagradian arrived with his mobile guard at the very 
last second to avert the worst for the camp itself. The Turks 
were driven back, but only as far as then captured trenches, 
which they held stubbornly. 

Luckiest of all, it was now mght, and a cloudy moonless 
night into the bargain. It had gathered quickly, unperceived. 
The major could no longer venture on another decisive thrust. 
In the dark the Armenians, who knew the Damlayik like their 
own bodies, had still, in spite of their many wounds, the ad- 
vantage over a whole division. The Kaimakam, disturbed pro- 
foundly by the immense losses they had sdstained, did not 

467 



quite know what to do with this unused viaory. TTie major 
swore by all his gods that by three tomorrow he would have 
the whole business cleared up. He developed his next plan of 
action. The Turks, all except a few camouflaged protecting 
garrisons, were to be noiselessly withdrawn from the defence 
sector. The whole force should encamp for the mght in the 
wide ilex gully and be ready, a few hours before daybreak, to 
thrust forward, like a great battenng-ram, through this last, 
inconsiderable obstacle. 

But that did not prevent the new Moslems in the villages, 
since now they were all householders, from preferring a night 
indoors to one in the open, and leaving the troops. 

Towards six o’clock Pastor Aram Tomasian, bathed in sweat 
and broken with fatigue, came into the women’s tent, gulped 
down two glasses of water, and gasped: “Iskuhi, Hovsannah. 
Get ready. Things aren’t going well. I’ll fetch you in time. We 
must find somewhere to hide, down among the rocks. I’m 
going out now to look for Father.” 

Tomasian had vanished again at once without properly 
getting his breath. Iskuhi, who had kept her promise, and not 
left the tent all day, helped the complaining Hovsannah to get 
dressed as well as she could, gave the child its bottle of watered 
milk, and with her right hand drew out from under the bed 
what little baggage they possessed. But suddenly she stopped 
her unfinished work and left Hovsannah without a word. 

An hour after sunset. The big square, with its trampled 
grass before the altar in the Town Enclosure. The leaders had 
not retired into their hut, but were sittmg on the grass by the 
altar steps. The people squatted close around them in heavy 
silence. The huts were abandoned. From time to time the 
screams of badly wounded men came across from the ‘'ho$> 
pital.” Some of the recent dead had been rescued from the 
last atuck. They lay in rows, incompletely hidden by sheets 
and sacking. No light. No fire. The Counal had forbidden any 

468 



voice to be raised above a whisper. The crowd was so heavily 
^ent that all could easily distinguish the whispering voices o£ 
representatives. 

Ter Haigasun seemed the only one there who could still 
keep his presence of min d. His voice sounded quiet and cir- 
cumspect. “We have only one night, that is to say eight hours’ 
darkness.” 

He was misunderstood. Even Aram Tomasian, whose heart 
was torn by the thought of Hovsannah, Iskuhi, and the child, 
proposed all kinds of hasty plans. He suggested in all serious- 
ness that perhaps it would be better to clear the camp and 
seek shelter in defts among the rocks, in the limestone caves 
and grottoes of the cliffs. But his suggestion found no partisans. 
It was evident that these men, without any reason for it, had 
begun to love their habitation and would defend it to the very 
last. They began to argue. These few hours of darkness threat- 
ened to crumble away, minute by minute, without results. 
Here and there out of the crouching people, a woman’s sup- 
pressed shriek and convulsive sobbing from time to time. This 
day had brought death to over a hundred families, reckoning 
those whose wounded had fallen into Turkish hands. Nor did 
anyone know how many seriously wounded were still lying 
out before the positions, whom no one so far had managed to 
bring back to camp. The heavy mght pressed like a low ced- 
ing on Musa Dagb. 

As their whisperings grew wilder and more pointless. Ter 
Haigasun assailed Gabnel sharply; “We’ve only one night, 
Bagradian Eifendi. Oughtn’t we to use these eight hours?” 

Gabriel had stretched himself out full length, his arms under 
his head, and was staring up at the dark above. He could 
scarcely defend himself against sleep. Everything sank away. 
Meaningless words came splashing round his ears. At this in- 
stant he had not even the energy to answer the priest. To him- 
self he mumbled something incomprehensible. It was then he 
£elt the little ice-cold hand touching his face. It was too dark 

469 



to recognize Iskuhi. After long straying about from post to 
post, she had found him at last. Now she sat down, as though 
it were the most natural thing for her, at his side, in the circle 
of the leaders. She did not seem even ashamed before her 
brother. This was their last and only night. 

Iskuhi’s cool hand roused and quickened Gabriel like fresh 
water. His torpor began to melt away, his mind to germinate. 
He sat up and took her hand, not heeding whether anyone 
saw his tenderness in the dark. Iskuhi’s hand seemed to lead 
him back to himself through the stubborn confusion of his 
fatigue. His muscles became taut. That physical well-bang 
filled him which a thirsty man feels who has drunk his fill. 
Suddenly the Council held its breath. Voices came nearer. 
They all sprang up. Turks.? Some lanterns swung into view. 
It was a komitap detachment returning to camp. It wanted its 
orders for tomorrow. The komitaps reported that only one of 
their number had been killed, and two taken prisoners by the 
Turks, and that they had kept their positions as before. At 
the same time they announced that the Turkish companies 
wae vacating most of the sectors on the height, to collect 
again in the ilex gully. Communication between the captured 
trenches and the command was being maintained by chains of 
patrols. Their intentions were clear as daylight. 

“Wc’li use tonight. Ter Haigasunl” , 

Gabriel said it so loud that the crowd could hear him. 
Simultaneously the other leaders seemed to have conquaed 
their paralysis. The same thought flashed through all their 
minds before Bagradian said a word. Only a strong surprise 
attack on the Turkish camp could avert disaster. But for such 
an attack the exhausted fighters of this day of blood had no 
strength left in them. The whole people, women and children, 
must in some way or other take part and give it the added 
physical weight of thousands. Now they were all tallfmg at 
once. Every mukhtar and teacher had his suggestions, till Ga- 
briel sharply commanded silence. They must not discuss this 

470 



question aloud. It was not impossible that Turkish spies had 
^pped into camp. Gabriel sent Chaush the Lion back to his 
sector to pick a hundred and fifty fighters, out of the twenty 
decads by which it was manned, who had suffered compara* 
tively little. He was to bring them quietly. Those left behind 
could and must suffice to hold their particular trenches and 
rock barricades against a counter-attack. The South Bastion 
and the sectors on the edge of the mountain, twenty decads in 
all, were to furnish the same, and did in fact, in the course 
of the next few hours, silently assemble on the altar square. 
With his komitajis and mobile guard Bagradian rallied a force 
of over five hundred. All these movements took a long time, 
since they had to be done in absolute quiet, and no commands, 
but only the most necessary directions, briefly whispered, could 
be given. It was very hard, in the thick darkness, to classify. 
Only his knowledge of each mdividual among them enabled 
Bagradian to divide into two groups these wearily torpid men. 
The first, the larger, was put in charge of the captain of the 
komitajis. When they had eaten a few rations and received 
their supply of cartridges— which again in the dark proved 
very difficult and laborious— they were moved some way to- 
wards the south, to creep down by remote tracks, noiseless as 
shadows, with endless precautions, through woods and thick- 
ets, across clearings and open spaces, nearer and nearer the 
Turkish camp. They had more to help them than their own 
instinctive knowledge of the ground; they had the campfires 
of the companies, which the yus-bashi had allowed to be lit 
on the edge of the ilex gully. These fires were built up on 
barren or rocky places, since otherwise, though the great gully 
itself was heavy with damp, the dryness of the undergrowth 
beyond might easily have caused a heath fire. But, in spite of 
these campfires, komitaji leaders managed to surround the 
whole elliptical valley. Armemans sat motionless in the trees; 
they lay hidden behind the thick arbutus bushes; here and 
there they curled themselves, without proper cover, round 

471 



kaotted roots. With never-shifting eyes they watched the 
which gradually quietened into silence. kept their riSes 
trained, although it must still be more than an hour before 
sudden hrmg up on the mountain gave them the signal. 

Bagradian had ordered Chaush Nurhan to lead the attack 
against the captured sector with the other group of a hun- 
dred and fifty rifles. Nurhan advanced his men from behind 
stone barricades, towards the chief trench, with its flank sup- 
ports. More than the dark — a soughing beneficent wind mu£S^ 
this crouching, rustling movement so perfectly that the Ar- 
menians managed to get some litde way past the trenches, on 
either side, and so have them surrounded. One thing was espe- 
cially in their favour. The Turkish trench garrison, one of the 
strong companies left behind, had stupidly ht a couple of 
acetylene lamps, which sharply ht up the soldiers’ heads and 
plunged all else in densest obscurity. Here, too, endlessly calm 
and set on their object, the Armenians sighted the garishly 
outhned targets. It was as though nobody breathed. Not a 
limb stirred. Every hfe seemed buried in the shaftless coal 
mine of this night. 

The Kaimakam and the major were standing together at the 
place where, between ruined walls, the track first leaves the 
lower slope, to continue upwards through the wide conduit of 
the ilex gully. They were on the lower edge of the camp. Some 
men with lanterns and torches stood in a group to light them. 

The yus-baslii glanced at his ultra-modern wristwatch, with 
its luminous face. “Plenty of time. I’m going to have them 
waked an hour before sunrise.” ' 

The Kaimakam seemed concerned for the major’s physical 
well-being. "Hadn’t you better sleep in your quarters, Yus- 
Bashi? You’ve a heavy day behind you. Bed will be good for 
you.” 

“No! Not I don’t want any sleep.” 

Ther Kaimakam said good-night, went a few paces followed 
by his lantern-bearers, came uphill again. “Don’t misunder- 

47 * 



stand my question, Major. But can I be quite certain that 
nothing unexpected will happen in the next few hours?” 

The major, who had not come down to meet him, but 
stayed where he was, with his head half averted, repressed an 
angry reply. This civilian meddling was insufferable. He 
growled: “Naturally I’ve taken all the usual precautionary 
measures. Although my poor fellows need their rest. I’ve set 
very strong outpost lines. You needn’t have bothered to come 
back, Kaimakam. I’ve also made up my mind to send out 
patrols to beat up the country all round our camp.” 

And as the major said, so it was done. But these patrols, 
exhausted corporals and men, went stumbling half asleep past 
the rigid Armenians, whose eyes shone feline out of the leaves. 
They were soon back to report to the officer in charge that the 
country all round was clear and in order. 

Bagraoian threw down the flaming matchstick with which 
he had just lit a cigarette. Little flames darted along the grass, 
and set Are to a tidt of it. Iskuhi, still at his side, trod out the 
greedy flames. 

“How dry everything is,” she said. 

It was this match that inspired the impossible thought in 
Bagradian. He stood there, lost in it. The notion was double- 
edged. It might do his own people as much damage as the 
enemy. Bagradian held out his handkerchief, to test the direc- 
tion of this strong wind. West wind, sea wind, drivings 
branches downwards towards the val'ey. Neither he alone nor 
the Council could make the decision. Ter Haigasun, the su- 
preme head of the people, must say yes or no. 

After an instant’s silence Ter Haigasun said: “Yes.” 

Meanwhile the whole armed force had vacated the altar 
square and Town Enclosure. Both storming-parties breathlessly 
awaited the signal. Between the surrounded trench and the 
rock barricades the whole mass of reservist villagers. But that 
was not all. It must unfortunately be recorded that Stephan, 

473 



long since escaped from his mother, was very dated and 
pleased with life, in spite of imminent catastrophe. This creep- 
ing and whispering in the dark, this close proximity of so 
many Jwdies on the alert, these sudden gleamings and ex- 
tinguishings of hooded lanteras, and a hundred more such 
adventurous uncertainties, keyed up young Stephan’s excited 
nerves to the sensation of having ban transported into the 
midst of a pleasantly thrilling world of dreams. All this was 
enhanced by the very unusual order just issued to the cohort 
of youth, and their pride in being allowed, as the last defence 
of the encampment, to share in plans soil not divulged. It is 
therefore easily understood that, even from their present ex- 
hausted state, Stephan and his comrades had been roused to 
irrepressible excitement. 

This strange order concerned the stores of oil. All the oil 
casks on the Damlayik, including those of the Bagradian fam- 
ily, were being rolled without further explanation on to the 
altar square, as well as whatever branches, sticks, and cudgels 
could be got together from the sites of the extinguished foes. 
First Stephan and his comrades, then the women, and all 
children of nine and over, were ordered from these piles of 
brushwood to pick out as strong and thick a brand as possible; 
The teachers and Samuel Avakian, who' supervised this dis- 
tribution, had all they could do to prevent noisy quarr elling . 
They struck with their fists and whispered: “Quiet, you silly 
devils.” It was the same round the oil casks. The branches 
must be dipped to the middle in the thick liquid, and twirled 
round in it. There were at least three thousand of them. It 
took a very long time. The people were still crowding round 
the casks when a whistle-blast gave the signal and the hidden 
attackers opened foe on those trenches taken by the Turks. 
Its sounds were echoed at once a hundredfold by hollow din 
out of the gully, interspersed with drowsy long-drawn cries 
of alarm, so hoarse as hardly to be human. 

Gabriel Bagradian stood on a little summit of rock entangle- 

474 



meats. During the sudden, crackling tumult of battle, a sound 
entirely different from that of any previous attack, the leader, 
in a kind of dream-like expectancy, had said nothmg at all to 
the people waiting behind. Several minutes went by. The 
craclde of small arms sounded thinner. Gabriel could scarcely 
realize that the first act of his surprise-attack had succeeded 
so quickly. But Chaush Nurhan was already giving the signal 
— a few vehement flourishes with his lantern. The trench was 
back in the hands of its first defenders, who overflowed it, 
rushing down the slope after the enemy. Some of the Turkish 
infantrymen got lost in the dark and fell into the hands of 
pursuing decads. Some of them ran, stumbled, leapt downhill, 
towards the shouting gully and were bayoneted, or felled by 
their pursuers’ rifle-butts. Gabriel sent Avakian back to the 
reserve. “Ready and forwards.” He waited till the whispering 
shoals approached the rock on which he stood; then he ran 
forward and headed them. Slowly they crowded onwards down 
the slopes, through the thick shrubs, past the dead, down to- 
wards the din-filled grove. 

There it was hke a hunt in full cry. The bravest among the 
officers, onbashis, and soldiers might try, again and again, to 
come up close to the brushwood conflagrations around their 
camp and douse them— they extinguished their own hves. The 
ring of komitaji rifles drove them back into the centre of the 
gully. Officers yelled contradictory orders. No one heard. In- 
fantrymen and saptichs ran about bellowing to find their rifles; 
yet, when they had them, they foimd them impossible to use. 
Every shot they fired might have killed a brother or a com- 
rade. Many flung away their arms, which impeded them, as 
they ran or leapt through this thorny pathlessness. The very 
inner life of Musa Dagh seemed to do its share in this grue- 
some destruction. The revengeful thicket grew rankly lux- 
uriant. Trees became treacherously taller. Whipping twigs 
and plants twined like lashes round the sons of the Prophet 
and brought them bw. Those who fell, lay on. The indiffer- 

475 



eace to death which marks thdr race descend^ on them. Thejr 
buried their heads in thorny nests. The yus-bashi, by dint o£ 
his own cool energy and many strokes with the fbt of his 
sword, bad collected round him a litdc knot of utterly flab- 
bergasted infantrymen. When sergeants, corporals, and old 
soldiers grew aware of their officer, in a feeble glimmer of 
dying campfire, they joined the rest. The major, thrusting his 
sword towards the heights, yelled: “Forward!” and: “After 
me!” With an odd excitement he noticed his phosphorescent 
wristwatch. Suddenly he remembered the words which he had 
said last night to the Kaimakam: ‘1 don’t want to go on living 
if tomorrow that Armenian camp still isn't cleared.” And 
truly at that moment, he did not want to live. “After me!” he 
yelled again and again. He could feel the whole force of his 
own will-power, able by its single strength to transfer this 
rout into a break-through. His example had its effect. And 
even their longing to be out of this inferno of a wood urged 
the soldiers on. They roused themselves to leave the cover of 
their own apathy and, bcllowmg, followed thar commander. 
They came scatheless to the upper end of the gully. With thud- 
ding hearts, utterly exhausted, having lost all consciousness of 
reality, they went on, lurching up the mountainside, into the 
hght of lanterns, the fire of decads, which received them. They 
were flung back like so many lifeless dummies. The yus-bashi 
did not at first perceive his wound. He felt very surprised at 
suddenly finding himself so isolated. Then his right arm felt 
heavy. To feel the blood and pain pleased, almost delighted, 
him. His shame, his loss, had become far less. He dragged 
himself back, with his eyes shut. . . . “Fall down somewhere,” 
he hoped, “and forget it all.” 

When, from recaptured trenches the din of batde retreated 
downhill, that was the sign for the Town Enclosure. A tongue 
of fire shot up. One of the oil-soaked torches began to 
crackle into flame and, within a few minutes, had passed it on 
to a thousand more. Most of the villagers had followed the 

476 



e£UDp& ^ Haik, Stfipban, and the odierhoys, v\du> then, with 
a tordb in each hand, moved o£E in a long, extended line. Earth 
had never seen such a torchli^t procession. Each one who 
bore these spluttering candles at arm’s length was startled by 
this incomprehensible clarity, which seemed to light up his 
very soul. The light was not, as single flames are, an intensifica- 
tion of endless dark, but, like the hght that fires a whole peo- 
ple, it shot a glorious breach in the dark of space. The long, 
far-flung lines and groups moved onwards slowly, ceremoni- 
ously, as if they were on their way, not to a battlefield, but to 
a place of prayer. 

Down in the villages, in Yoghonoluk, Bitias, in Habibli, 
Azir, in Wakef and Kheder Beg— yes, in the north, in Ke- 
bussiye even, the honey village, not one new tenant could get 
to sleep. When the wild clatter of the surprise attack reached 
these villages, their armed inhabitants snatched up rifles, set 
out, and now garrisoned the low ridges, though they did not 
venture too near the gully. But their women stood in the 
gardens, or on the roofs, avidly and fearfully listening to the 
furious yelping of the bullets. Suddenly, at one in the morning, 
they saw the sun come up behind the Damlayik. Its black 
ridge stood sharply outlined; behind it spread a tender, rosy 
glow. This unearthly vision, this ncver-to-be-equalled sign and 
wonder, worked on these credulous women’s spirits like the 
trump of doom. And when, a short while later, the whole 
edge of the mountain burst into flames, it was too late for 
natural explanations. )esus Christ, the prophet of unbelievers^ 
had let the sun of His might rise behind the mountain; the 
Armenian }inn of Musa Dagh, in alhance with Peter, Paul, 
Thomas, and the other worthies of the Evangel, were protect- 
ing this people. The anaent myth of supernatural powers be- 
hind the Armenians had found its completest confirmation. 
More than these simple women became imbued with it. The 
mullahs, too, watching the miracle from the round gallery 
encircling the church dome of Yoghonoluk, took flight out of 

477 



this mosque that had been the Church of Ever-Increa^g 
Angelic Powers. 

Less magically, but far more terribly, were those Turkish 
soldiers still on the mountain-slope appalled by this irresistible 
line of lights. It gave the impression of vasdy superior num- 
bers, sprung up out of nowhere, as though the whole Arme- 
ian nation, all the convoys dispersed over Turkey, were 
gathered at that time and in this place to avenge, with torches 
and balls of Hre, on a mere handful of their oppressors, the 
monstrous wrongs they had endured. The little garrisons of 
Turks before each defence-sector raced back down the slopes. 
No officer could manage to hold them. All still alive in the 
cursed region of the ilex gully had fought their way, heedless 
now of bullets, through thickets, and come out on the lower 
slopes. The Armenians were not numerous enough to box- 
barrage the mouth of the gully. A few valiant officers and men, 
missing their bashi from among them, had once again forced 
their way out, to snatch up that wounded, unconscious officer 
just as he was about to be taken prisoner. They carried him 
down to Villa Bagradian headquarters. During which painful 
journey he came to himself. He knew now that everything 
was over, that the Christians had scattered his whole power, 
that for him there could be no return, no reinstatement. From 
the depths of his soul he cursed the bullet which had only 
shattered his right arm, and not done its business more effi- 
ciendy. He only longed to faint again. That prayer, however, 
remained unanswered. The clearest, coldest perception of pre- 
cisely what this would mean worked on and on in him. 

The procession of fire had no more enemies left to face. 
Slowly the long lines of incendiaries approached the ilex gully, 
the woods around it. About half-way down the slope Ter 
Haigasun halted the long lines and gave the order (passed 
from one to the other) to cast fiaming stumps into the under- 
growth. The flames sank down in the smoking shrubs. From 
all sides, in a few minutes, there came an endless crackling, as 

478 



of pistol shots, as if the whole Damlayik would explode. 
Flames shot high in many places. The woods were on fire. 
Woe, if the wind should veer in the next few hours. The Town 
Enclosure, which lay nearest the edge of the mountain, would 
have been the prey of flying sparks and tongues of flame, borne 
down the wind. It was fortunate that Gabriel Bagradian should 
have cleared a glacis before these sectors. This forest fire ate 
its way so quickly, so instantaneously, up the sun-dried flanks 
of the Damlayik, that what stood here in a roaring mass of 
flame looked like no earthly fire, no earthly fuel. There was 
scarcely time for komitajis and decads lower down the slope 
to rescue the spoils of the attack; more than two hundred 
Mauser rifles, abundant munitions, two field-kitchens, five 
sumpter mules with their fodder, bivvy sheets, rugs, lanterns, 
and much besides. 

When the real sun came up, a stony sleep lay on the Damla- 
yik. The fighters slept where they had fallen. Only a very few 
had had the strength to drag back into cover. The boys slept, 
coiled in heaps on the bare earth. Women in the Town En- 
closure had sunk down hfeless on their mats, unwashed, 
tousled, without a thought of their tiny children who whim- 
pered hungrily. Bagradian slept; so did all the leaders. Even 
Ter Haigasun had not the strength to complete his Mass of 
thanksgiving. Towards the end of it, overcome with exhaus- 
tion, he had sunk down like a drunkard before the altar. The 
mukhtars slept, without having picked the day’s sheep for 
killing. The butchers slept and the milkmaids. No one went 
to work. No fires were lit in the kitchen square, nor water 
carried from the wellsprings. No one could attend to the many 
wounded still lying in agony in their trenches, nor to those 
who m the course of hours had managed to drag their way to 
the hospital-hut. All who are summarized so impersonally in 
that one colourless word “wounded” lay strewn about in hor- 
rible reality: faces without eyes or noses, chins mushed into 

479 



bleeding pulp, bodies smashed by dum-dum bulkts, ydpii^ 
men with stomach wounds, dying of thirst. Only death, .Bet 
Bedros Hekim, could help these wretched. But till he beat 
compassionat^y over them, they too were helped through 
dragging hours by some narcotic, feverish half-sleep. 

Down in the valley slept the infantry, the saptiehs, chettehs, 
as many as came clear of the slaughter. The officers slept in 
their rooms at Villa Bagradian. Yesterday’s first viaim, the 
Kolagasi from Aleppo, had been taken back in an ambulance 
to Antakiya many hours ago. Now another wounded officer 
had replaced him on Stephan’s bed. The Kaimakam, too, in 
Juliette’s bedroom, had been overcome by sleep. He had been 
engaged on a report to the Wall of Aleppo when it became 
no longer possible to sit upright. 

But his mind and conscience worked in the depths of sleep 
with more cruel truth than ever in the meshes of consuousness. 
He had just encountered the worst set-back in his career. Yet 
e/ery failure contains the elements of grace in it, since failure, 
with a grin, reveals the ineptitude of human estimates of 
worth. This Kaimakam, this high official, this member of 
Ittihad, he of whom the party thought so highly, this Osmanli, 
steeped to the marrow in all the pride of his warrior race — what 
had he just been forced to experience? That the weak wer& 
strong, the strong in ^reality impotent. Yes, impotent even in 
those heroic acuvities which made the weak appear so des- 
picable. But in his sleep the Kaimakam’s perceptions went 
deeper still. So far he had never one instant doubted that 
Enver Pasha and Talaat Bey were m the right; more, that 
against the Armenian millet they had acted with consummate 
statecraft. Yet now furious doubts of Enver Pasha and Talaat 
Bey reared up within the Kaimakam, since failure is also the 
stern parent of truth. Had men the right to work out skilful 
plans by which this or that people should be stamped out? 
Was there even, as he had asserted a thousand times there 
was, enough practical basis for such a scheme? Who is to say 

480 



that one people is worse or better than another? Certainly men 
oannot say it. And God, that day on the Damlayik, had given 
a most unmistakable answer. The Kaimakam saw himself 
placed in certain contingencies which made him feel not a 
litde concerned for his skin. He was sending in a written resig- 
nation to His Excellency the Wali of Aleppo, destroying, of his 
own free will, the whole structure of his career. He offered 
the Armenians, in the person of Gabriel Bagradian, wrapped 
in a bathgown, freedom and friendship. In the central com- 
mittee of Ittihad he urged the immediate recall of all Arme- 
nian convoys and passed a compensatory tax to indenmify 
them. But the Kaimakam’s soul only haunted such ethical 
summits in deepest sleep. The thinner wore the fabric of his 
slumbers, the nearer he returned to everyday consciousness, the 
more utterly did his surface mind reject any such foolhardy 
suggestions. At last, in far smoother, more peaceful repose, he 
hit on a convenient way out. Why not simply omit any super- 
fluous, uneasy report to the central authorities? The Kaima- 
kam slept on till midday. 

The dead slept, the Christians and the Mussulmans, strewn 
here and there in the bushes above the ilex gully, the thickets 
of the northern side. The licking flames of this huge mountain 
conflagration crept nearer with overweening playfulness. These 
flames seemed to rouse the sleepers; they raised them up from 
underneath, so that the dead, with a stiff ]erk of terror, sat 
bolt upright, before their bodies started crackling, and they 
sank back into the cleansmg holocaust. From hour to hour 
the Arc increased, spreading far and wide across the Damlayik, 
to north and south. It halted only at the barren stone slopes of 
that incline which falls sheer from the South Bastion, while a 
rocky inlct'protected the North Saddle against it. The green 
slopes of this mountain blessed with many springs, this miraclf; 
of the Syrian coast, triumphed once again with flaming ban- 
ners, till at last nothing was left to devour but a strong obstacle 
field of glowing embers. Thus did Musa Dagh armour with 

481 



fire, with red-glittering debris, her weary sons, lost in thdr gulf 
of sleep, unaware that for some time now they need fear no 
more from their pursuers. None realized how a friendly wind 
kept danger helpfully off the Town Enclosure, driving sparks 
and tongues of dame downhill. The villagers and the decads 
slumbered on till late afternoon— only then did the Council 
meet to resolve that every imperilled point must be fully 
cleared of wood and undergrowth. This was a new and ex- 
hausting task. 

They had slept all through the day, all but one of them. She 
in her tent sat on the bed and never moved. But it served her 
litde to make herself feel smaller and smaller within the buzz- 
ing cocoon of her inexpressible ahenation, her inescapable 



4 


Sato*s Ways 

Although the lucky wind still kept its direction, this forest, 
or rather mountain fire had a deeply depressing effect on all 
these people. There was no more darkness. The red-eyed nights 
squinted and blinked at them. Crazy shadows leapt up to 
dance. Unendurable heat, at midnight just as at midday, with- 
out a breath of cooling air. Biting fumes strangled every 
breath. They ate into the membrane of nose and throat. A 
unique and curious form of cold in the head spread savagely 
through the whole camp, making tempers more and more un- 
certain. 

Instead of pride in victory, jubilant thanksgiving, the first 
signs of demoralization began to show themselves, those signs 
of a sinister inward process, which threatened to destroy all 
disciphne in sudden bursts of wild ill-temper. This, in great 
measure, was the cause of the ugly brawl with Sarkis Kilikian, 
which took place, unluckily, on the very night of this day’s 
repose. It is one of the reasons why neither Ter Haigasun nor 
Gabriel would let themselves be influenced by the fact that 
now, by God’s mercy, a long truce might be expected. To be 
sure, this mad idea of setting a mountain on Rre had, with the 
vast new loot of rifles, much improved the prospects of the 
defence. Even the hope that the Turks might renounce all 
further attempts was by no means so insane as it had been. 
And yet— only the breast of the Damlayik was in flames; its 
hips, the stone slopes above Suedia and the North Saddle, were 
as liable as ever to be attacked. In no circumstances therefore 

483 



mutt the stringent routine o£ the trenches he rriioDcd The 
leaders* authority must be kept as implacable as ever. 

It was just as essential to re-establish the morale of the Town 
Enclosure. What Ter Haigasun called “normality” must be re^ 
affirmed against all destructive evil powers. So that, when it 
met that night, on the evemng of the twenty-fourth, the Coim- 
cil of Leaders, to avoid any mass excitement, decided against 
ceremonial burial of the dead. 

In this la^e afternoon, detachments, sent to bring in the dead, 
came back with sixty-seven corpses, out of the hundred and 
thirteen missing men. There were also a good many mortally 
wounded, who died that night, since they had no proper 
medical aid. Dr. Bedros Altouni had much to say to the Coun- 
cil on this point. In his sharp htde voice, which certainly was 
not suited to solemn talk of corpses, he informed them that, 
since the summer heat was unbearably intensified by this fire, 
it was essential- to bury at once. Every minute’s delay was a 
danger to the whole camp. He, Dr. Altouni, disliked having 
to say such a thing to mourners, but by now, surely, everyone’s 
nose must have convmced him of the absolute necessity for 
funerals. Not a second to lose! Let every bereaved family set 
to work and dig its grave at the place appointed. The Coun- 
cil, in Altouni’s opinion, would have been far wiser to leave 
all the dead to the mercy of the great fire. It had not been 
able to make up its mmd to do so. 

So the dead were wound into their shrouds, for the comfort 
of orphans and widows. A heap of his own earth was (^ranted 
to each. 

This order did not, as some had feared it might, cause much 
ill-fcehng among the people. They feared too much for their 
own health. And corruption had already become apparent. 
Three hours after midnight, it was finished. This exhausting 
work had stifled pain. Only a very few surviving relatives re- 
mained standing by the graves, with the candles they had been 
keeping so long. Reflections from the mountain fire swallowed 

484 



tb^ poor corpses Into their shadow. Numk and her colleagues 
had stayed in the valley. They dared no longer leave their 
holes, since the Turks had caught two old beggarmen in the 
maize-fields, and thrashed them to death. 

On the following morning, August 25, two very important 
public events were due. The first concerned the selection of 
volunteers for Alexandretta and Aleppo. Swimmers and run- 
ners must leave at once. The other event was the trial of 
Sarkis Kihkian. The case stood as follows: There could be no 
doubt that Sarkis had to answer to the people for heavy losses, 
and yet Gabriel had not thought of callmg him to account for 
criminal negligence, since in ail previous attacks the Russian 
had behaved with the coolest gallantry. Gabriel had a certain 
insight into human incalculabilities, and knew besides that it 
is impossible to reconstruct with any reality a determined 
instant in any battle. But other leaders disagreed. There had 
been a brawl on the altar square. Sarkis had stood surrounded 
by an angry mob of his comrades. . . . Let him explain— 
answer their questions— justify himself! He neither justified 
nor explained. He stood, with his bleached face, his incurious 
eyes, his mouth shut before the frenzied accusations that spat- 
tered around him. This silence may not have been as insolent, 
malicious, self-assertive, as it seemed. Perhaps Kilikian himself 
could not understand his sudden negligence, and disdained all 
such easy excuses as “fatigue” or “misunderstood intentions.” 
He was shoved this way and that; fists kept dancing under his 
nose. Probably any jury would have found that he acted in self- 
defence, had It not been that he struck the first blow. . . . 
And had not that blow been so terrible! 

For a while, apathetic as ever, he let them shove and push 
him as they pleased, seemed indeed scarcely to notice what 
was happening. Suddenly, then, he snatched his bony fist 
out of a pocket, and dashed it in his youngest tormentor’s face, 
so horribly that the lad collapsed, streaming with blood from 
a broken nose, having lost an eye. It was done with incredible 

485 



swiftness. For a half-second Kilikian had straightened up out 
of his slouch, his eyes had seemed to flare — ^then they went as 
dead again as ever. No one would have thought him the 
aggressor, and, at first, luckily for him, most did not know 
how it had happened, and retreated a step. But when, with 
shouts of anger, they closed m on him, it would have gone 
very badly with him indeed, had the police of the Town En* 
closure not saved him by taking him in charge. 

During the morning of his trial by the Councd, he admitted 
indifferently that it was he who had struck the first blow; that 
he had known just what its effects would be. Nor would he 
attempt to prove self-defence. He seemed too detached, too 
bored, too slack, to speak. The circumstances in which he must 
live or die may have been, to such a man as Kihkian, a matter 
of more profound indifference than other people could ever 
realize. Gabriel heard the case without saying a word. He 
neither defended nor accused. The exasperated people de- 
manded punishment. 

Ter Haigasun, having heard the last witness, sighed: “What 
am I to do with you, Sarkis Kihkian? One only needs to look 
at you to see that you don’t fit into any order established by 
God! I ought to have you turned out of camp.” 

He did not, but instead sentenced Kihkian to five days’ im- 
prisonment in irons, intensified by three days’ fasting. This 
punishment was worse than it may appear. For a brawl, in 
which he had not really been the aggressor, Kilikian found 
himself degraded from his rank as a respected leader and 
thrust back into the criminal underworld. It was the harsh- 
est degradation. But no indication on his part suggested that 
he had any honour left to degrade. After the trial they bound 
him hand and foot with ropes and placed him in the lock-up 
which formed the third room of the government-hut. Now 
Kilikian looked as he had so many times in the course of his 
inexplicable life, in which punishment had come so swift on 
the hcek of the vaguest misdoing, or of none at all. To 

486 



penalties also he submitted, with indiiSercnt eyes, as to yc 
another, familiar, inescapable incident, in a life so subtly 
contrived. But this prison-house differed at least from all 
other, similar, institutions in his wide experience by the fact 
that he had to share it with so august a spirit as Krikor. Right 
and left, two kennels, with plank beds, as alike as cells. The 
one, a shameful lock-up; the other— the universe entire. 

Gabriel could feel in every nerve the advent of an incalculable 
event which would nullify the results of their recent victory. 
He had therefore urgently insisted that the messages must go 
out that day. Something must be made to happen quickly. 
And, even if the attempt proved vain, it would at least en- 
gender hope and expectation. The volunteers assembled, as 
the leaders had ordained, on the altar square. The whole 
camp was astir, since this choice of messengers, freely come to 
offer their lives, concerned the whole people. 

Gabriel came from a short inspection of the decads. In view 
of the dangerous slackness and irritation, which threatened to 
spread all through the camp, he had ordered fresh drill and 
fighting-exercises for that same afternoon. His whole first 
defence had now been adequately armed with the two hun- 
dred freshly captured Mauser rifles. The best of his reserve 
had been sent to fill in the gaps, left by the recent, heavy fight- 
ing. Already Chaush Nurhan’s jerky bugle-calls could be 
heard, drilling these recruits. Iskuhi had come half-way to 
meet Gabriel. Since the first, sudden emotion sprang up bp- 
tween them, she had sought him cut with the frankness of a 
little girl. They were walking side by side, without a word, the 
rest of the way to the altar square. Gabriel, whenever he had 
her with him, would be filled with the same strange, restful 
security. Always it was the same sensation, that what he felt for 
her was the most intimate thing he had ever known. Her 
warmth, as of a clear fire, seemed to reach far back, beyond 
any frontiers of conscious memory. Nor did she leave his side 

487 



in the {dace of a8seiid>Iy, although she was the only womaiv' 
standing here without excuse in the midst of thoe dduting 
men. Had she no fear that they all might comment on her 
behaviour? That even her brother, Aram, might suspect? 

About thirty young men waited as volunteers for the Coun- 
cil of Leaders to choose among them. Five of them were still 
in their teens. The eldest among the cohort of youth had been 
allowed to give in their names. Gabriel, with a start of fear 
and anger, saw his son Stephan beside Haik. After a bnef 
consultation with the other members of the Council, Ter 
Haigasun announced his choice. It was he who always gave 
the final deasion in any estimate of the people’s capacities and 
strength. 

The swimmers had been easy enough to pick out. In Wakei^ 
the southernmqst village, on the edge of the Orontes plain, and 
hence nearly on the coast, there were two famous divers and 
swimmers, one nineteen, the other twenty. Ter Haigasun 
handed out the leather belt, with its appeal, sewn up inside, 
to the possible commander of any English, American, French, 
Russian, or Italian gunboat. The swimmers were to set out 
that night after sunset, over the North Saddle, having spent 
their last afternoon with their families. 

The question of the runners to Aleppo took a few minutes 
longer to settle. They had decided that only one young man 
should go out on that dangerous mission. But no Armenian 
adult. Pastor Aram Tomasian was convinced, would have the 
same chance as would a boy of getting to Aleppo alive. Ar- 
menian boys wore almost the same dress as Turkish. A boy 
would have twice the chance of slipping through. The justice 
of this was admitted. And one name occurred to them all: 
“Haik.” That dour, resolute lad, with the fabulous swiftness, 
his body as hard as polished stone, was the right messenger, 
or nobody. Not another peasant in all that countryside had 
Haik’s sightless adaptabihty to the earth over which he moved, 
that omniscient eye, as of some great bird, that setter’s nose^ 



ifaift of a rat, the slippery ainddeaess ot an otter. If any- 
one here could succeed in evading death on the road to Aleppo, 
it must be Haik, and only he. 

But, when Ter Haigasun gave out Haik’s name from the 
altar steps, there was a most unseemly protest from Stephan. 
Gabriel’s face twitched with anger as he saw his son come im- 
^pudently forth from his place in the line of volunteers and 
plant himself there under his nose. Never before had the crude 
precocity, the mental and physical untidiness, of his own son 
seemed so apparent. 

Stephan bared his teeth, like an angry dog. “Why only 
Haik? I want to go to Aleppo, too. Father.” 

His mutmous voice shrilled out over the whole square. Such 
words, from a son to a father, were never heard among Arme- 
nians. Not even the unusual circumstance, this zeal in their 
defence, could excuse them. 

Ter Haigasun looked up impatiently. “Tell your son to be- 
have himself, Gabriel Bagradian.” 

Pastor Aram Tomasian, used at Zeitun to dealing with 
difficult boys, tried to pacify Stephan. “The Council of Lead- 
ers has decided that only one is to go to Aleppo. A big, intelli- 
gent fellow like you ought to know what the Council’s orders 
mean to all of us. Absolute obeffience — isn’t that it?” 

But the conqueror of Turkish howitzers was not to be 
fobbed off with legalities. Having no distinct notion of this 
duty, nor of how unfit he was to perform it, he could only fed 
he was bang snubbed, set bdow the great competitor. The 
presence of so many assembled worthies did not deter in the 
least his touchy impudence. He still glared boldly at his father. 
"Haik’s only about three months older than mel He can’t even 
speak French. Mr. Jackson won’t understand him. And what 
Haik can do, I can ” 

Now Gabriel lost his temper. He came one quick step nearer 
Stephan. “Do? You can’t do anything. You’re a soft European 
— that’s all you arc. A spoilt city child! Why, they’d snap you 

489 



up Cke a blind cat. Get out! Go to your mother. If you stay 
another minute, I’ll ” 

Such harshness was most unwise. It hit Stephan’s most 
tender susceptibilities. He was being publicly kicked down 
from the place he had found it so hard to win. Now ail his 
deeds had been done in vain: his fruit-stealing, his heroic cap- 
ture of the guns, which had nearly earned him the title “Lion.” 
In a flash Stephan grasped the fact that no deed is done once 
and for all, that we always have to begin again at the begin- 
ning. He became suddenly very quiet. His sunburnt skin 
flushed darker than ever. He stared at Iskuhi with big eyes 
as though he were only just discovering her. It seemed to him 
that she answered his look severely, in a frigid stare. Iskuhi 
as the hostile witness of his defeat I It was too much! Suddenly 
Stephan began to bellow, not like an almost grown-up hero, a 
crack shot, the captor of enemy artillery, but like an unjusdy 
punished schoolboy. Yet these childish sobs evoked no sym- 
pathy in the others, rather a kind of unholy glee. It was a 
fairly complex state of mind that invaded not only Stephan’s 
comrades, but the grown-ups, and concerned not only the son 
but, for some obscure reason, Gabnel. “You don’t belong here.” 
It needed only a pretext for that sensation, and there it was! 
Stephan at once suppressed his howling grief. But its brief 
display had been quite enough to arouse contempt, not only 
among his comrades, but in all the other groups of the cohort 
of youth. Only Haik stood lost in serious bought. All this had 
noting to do with him. . . . 

Now the only thing left to Stephan was to slink away, with 
suspiciously heaving shoulders. Gabriel watched him go, in 
silence. He had ceased to be angry, having remember^ the 
little boy in Montreux— Stephan, charmingly dressed, his head 
bent sideways over the notepaper, forming big, round letters. 
He thought: “Stephan’s getting a big boy. He’ll be fourteen in 
November.” . . . And this “he’ll be” . . . “in November” . . . 
what idiotically Utopian thought was this? A rliill presenti- 

490 



ment stole over him. . . . Something that can no longer he 
prevented! . . . Gabriel went to Three-Tent Square for an* 
other talk with his son. 

But neither Stephan nor Juliette was to be found there. In 
the sheikh’s tent he changed his underclothes. As he did so, 
he missed one of the coins given him by the Agha Rifaat 
Bereket. It was the gold coin, with the head in sharp half- 
relief of the great Armeman king, Aschod Bagrathuni. He 
turned out the pockets of every suit. The gold coin was no- 
where to be found. 

It was most unlucky that this new incursion of Turks and 
Arabs should have put an end to Sato’s vagrant double life. 
And her status among the children was lower than ever. Ter 
Haigasun, a few days ago, in spite of all the teachers’ recal- 
citrance, had insisted that school must be properly kept. But 
now, not even that martinet, Hrand Oskaman, could enforce 
discipline in class if Sato were sitting among the rest. “Stinker! 
Stinker!” chirruped the whole merciless flock, the instant that 
vagrant entered the school enclosure. Even up here, in this 
last refuge of the persecuted, Sato, that lousy orphan, supplied 
these children with a welcome pretext for feeling distin- 
guished and nobly born. During one such class, taken by 
Iskuhi, their derision howled so loud that even the teacher, 
without concealing her own repugnance, drove the hated Sato 
out of class. “Go away, Sato; and don’t let me see you again, 
ever!” 

So far, in stolid indifference, ignorant alike of honour and 
shame, Sato had managed to hold her own. But now that her 
admired Iskuhi, her kuchuk hanum, had joined the enemy, 
thrusting her forth, Sato had to obey. In her short European 
frock with the butterfly sleeves, which, ragged and caked with 
mud, made her look grotesque, she went trailing off. But only 
as far as the nearest bush, under which she lay down quiedy, 
like a jackal watching a caravan-camp with ravenous eyes. 

491 



Sato was not so poor as she seemed. She, too, had a world* 
For instance, she could understand the animals which strayed 
across her vagrant way. Iskuhi and all the others would no 
doubt have said without hesitation that Sato was a cruel little 
beast to them. Everything about her suggested it. But — on the 
contrary I This bastard waif vented none of her spite on 
beasts, which she handled with a protective, whispering sym- 
pathy. Her insensitive hands would pick up a hedgdiog, and 
she would whisper so long that at last the ball began to un- 
roll, the pointed snout darted forth, the alert, businesslike 
eyes of a small bazaar-shopkeeper sized her up quickly. 
Sato, who could only speak to grown-ups as though she had a 
gag in her mouth, was expert m every shade of bird-cry. Such 
gifts, which would no doubt have commanded respect, she 
diligently hid, fearing they might do her social damage. And, 
as with beasts, so could she talk with the old madwomen, 
crouching in their holes round the Yoghonoluk churchyard. 
Sato never noticed that these breathless, disconnected gabblers 
used their tongues in any way differently from other, sanely 
gossiping matrons. In any case it was very pleasant to take 
one’s share in such friendly talks, which made no fatiguing 
demands on one’s choice of expression. The smaller beasts, 
these female half-wits, and sometimes even a bhnd beggar, 
formed a realm apart, in which Sato found herself respected, 
as every human being must needs feel respected, in order to 
live. Though, to be sure, with Nunik, Wartuk, Manushak, 
Sato was still a respectful underling. 

But now this communion was shattered. It was dull. There 
was reaUy no point in straying about within camp bounds 
Little by httle, this idle resdessness got diverted into channels 
of its own: spying on grown-ups. With the sharp instinct which 
mocked all that unintelligible book-learning, Sato perceived 
whatever was animal in these grown-ups, all that might have 
escaped their control, 'all cravings, their mad self-seekings. 
Of those emotions of whose dangerous existence in the world 

492 ' 



was scarcely codadously aware, idw could nonetbeless hear 
the grass grow. The avid litde spy, like a magnet^ drew all 
that was not in order towards hnself. 

It is therefore not in the least surprising that Sato soon real> 
ized how things were between Gonzague and Juhette. The 
pricking, onunous sense of a major catastrophe mvaded her. 
AIL disinherited people know this delightful prescience of 
catastrophe, the deheious hope that the world is about to 
crash, which forms one of the strongest impulses both to minor 
scandals and revolution. Sato kept close behind these two. 
Next to Bagradian himself, Juhette a'nd Monsieur Gonzague 
were the most resplendent apparitions in Sato’s world. She 
did not hate them in the least, m the way bad servants hate 
their masters. She felt a primitive’s curiosity for something 
which seems almost superhuman. 

She had soon spied out their hiding-place, the secret place 
of myrtle and rhododendron. With delight trickling down her 
spine, she forced her muzzle slowly through the thicket. Her 
ghttering eyes were avid for this sight sent by the gods. The 
august, resplendent hanum, from France, the giantess, the 
ever-perfumed . . . now her hair hung in wisps over a face 
which advanced its almost lifeless surfaces, its wide, dolorous 
mouth, towards the steady features of the'man who, with 
drooping lids, still seemed acutely on the alert as, first, he 
savoured the gift, before drawing it close. Sato, shakmg with 
excitement, watched the play of Gonzague’s long, narrow 
hands, like the knowing hands of a blind tar-player, come 
and go across the hanum’s white shoulders, and cup her 
breasts. 

Sato saw all there was to see. Also, what was not to be 
seen. The schoolteachers had given her up long ago. Not even 
“twice two’s four,” not even the alphabet, could be hammered 
into this creature’s stuttering mind, occupied with its own 
aimless images. Sato could make no progress, since her over- 
developed sense of tracks and clues engulfed all mental pos- 

493 



al^ties. Hidden among myrtle and rhododendron, she could 
taste the delicious ardours of this interlude, and yet, all the 
time, he well aware how lost and bewildered Juliette was, 
how resolved, Gonzague. Her mmd was nothing, her in- 
stinct everything. Sato would have had no reason to curtail 
the raptures of the voyeuse. had there not been a certain com- 
plication, wounding to her most vulnerable emotion. Another 
couple had not long escaped her setter’s nose. They offered no 
spectacle, had found no refuge for their desire. These two 
did not steal away together into labyrinthine bushes along 
the coast; they preferred the barren knolls and empty reaches 
of the high plateau. It was hard to spy them out without being 
seen. But Sato, luckily, or unluckily, had the faculty for mak- 
ing herself invisible. At this she was even better than Master 
Haik. This second pair kept drawing her off the scent of 
her sweet absorbing espionage on the first. True, she scarcely 
managed to see them kiss. But, between Iskuhi and Gabriel, 
this never-kissing passion burned far deeper, into Sato’s heart, 
than all the embraces between Gonzague and Juliette. These 
two had only to touch hands, and glance briefly at each other; 
then, as though shattered, avert their eyes, to assure Sato that 
their union was far more maddeningly complete than all the 
close proximity of the others. Above all the communion be- 
tween Iskuhi and Gabriel was detestable, and made Sato sad. 

Her memory had imagined a golden age. Had the orphan- 
age teacher in Zeitun not always been good and gentle with 
Sato? Had she not often expressly said: “My Sato’’? Had she 
not even allowed her Sato to squat on the grass at her feet, and • 
pat these feet, and stroke them even? Who but the effendi 
was to blame for the fact that this happy relationship, this 
mutual esteem, and their caresses, had ended harshly? Who 
but the efFendi was responsible for the fact that, when Iskuhi’s 
Sato approached her, with a loving and open heart, she only 
snapped: “Go away, Sato, and don’t let me see you again, 
ever’’? Sadly the waif sought out a place to think in. But 

494 



plaoning and reflection were never her strong points. Either 
she evoked transient images, or would start at the sudden 
flash of a perception. These perceptions and images had no 
need at all of the assistance of anythmg hke consaous under- 
standmg. They worked blindly towards an aim: just as they 
could join up threads, let them drop, take them up again, and 
so spread a web of planned revenge, of which their mistress 
was almost unaware. 

JuuETTE was on her way to Gabriel. 

Gabriel was on his way to Juhettc. 

They met between Three-Tent Square and the North Sad- 
dle. 

“I was on my way to look for you, Gabriel,” she said. He 
said the same. That absent-minded “running to seed,” which 
for so long had infected the “foreigner” had done its work. 
Where was Juliette’s “sparkling step”? She walked' like some- 
one who has been sent somewhere on an errand. As indeed 
she had. Gonzague had sent her to tdl the truth at last, and 
announce her wishes, since this was the time of separation. 
. . . “Am I getting short-sighted,” she thought, “I see so 
badly?” She was surprised at the November twilight of this 
hot midsummer afternoon. Was it the swaths of smoke all 
over the Damlayik? Was it that other, confusing vapour, 
thickening daily, which seemed to have clouded her mind? 
She was surprised that, as she stood facing Gabriel, Gonzague 
should have become so absurdly unreal. She was surprised th^t 
this Gonzague let her encumber him. Everything seemed so 
far away, and so surprising. . . . Her garter had slipped, and 
her stocking was fdhng below her knee, a sensation she 
loathed. Yet she never stirred. *Tve suddenly lost the strength 
even to bend,” so it crossed her mind. “And yet, this evening, 
I shall have to climb down all those rocks, to Suedia.” 

The husband and wife began a really remarkable conversa- 
tion, which ended in nothing. Juliette started it: “I blame my- 

495 



tdf terribly for not having b^n with you these last few 
You’ve had a great deal to go through, and you’ve done mag- 
nificendy. And you’re always in danger. Oh, mon ami, I’ve 
behaved disgrac^uily to youl” 

Such an admission, a few weeks previously, would have 
moved him. Now his reply was almost formal: “I, too, have 
you on my conscience, Juliette. I ought to have been consider- 
ing you more. But, believe me^ especially recently, I just haven’t 
been able to manage it.” 

Very true, although he gave it a double meaning. His truth 
should have given her courage to speak hers. She only hastened 
to agree: “Of course you haven’t. I can quite see you’ve had 
very different things to think of, Gabriel.” 

He proceeded along this dangerous road: “I’ve naturally al- 
ways known, and been very glad to think, you weren’t entirely 
deserted.” 

This got them both to the point in their tepid dialogue, a( 
which it was as though they had both shammed dead, al- 
though the vistas around them were free on all sides. It could 
have been Juhette’s chance, had she seized it quickly enough. 
She could have spoken her mind: 

*Tm a stranger here, Gabriel. The Armenian fate has been 
stronger than our marriage. Now I’ve got my very last chance 
of avoiding that fate. You yourself have suggested I should, 
a hundred times, and were always making plans to save 
me. I’d hoped I had the strength to hold out to the end. I 
haven’t. I can’t ever have;, since this fight isn’t my fight. Let 
me go.” 

None of these very simple and natural words passed Juliette’s 
lips. Filled as she still was with the vain delusion that she, in 
their marriage, had been the donor, the superior, she was sure 
that, if she said it, he would break down. Could she suppose 
that perhaps he might only answer her good-naturedly: 

“I quite understand, chine. Even if I must perish because of 
it, I ^ haven’t the right to hold you back. I’ll do all that’s 

496 



m mj power to help jrotL HI evoi 1<% Stcf^iaa go, £oi your 
indb^ since I know how much you want to save Jiim.” 

Frankness, in these few minute^ might have made as clean 
a job of it as that, had not things been really too complex to 
disentangle. Juliette knew as little of Gabriel as he of her. Nor 
did she know if she really was in love with Gonzague. Ga> 
briel was equally unaware how much he was in love with 
Iskuhi, and of what kind of love it was that linked them. 
Juliette’s religious and bourgeois past made her recoil at the 
thought of sinful happiness. She had many reasons for mis- 
trusting the transparently impenetrable Gonzague, and not 
least that he was three years younger than she. In Pans there 
would have been a traditional form for all of tnis. On these 
fantastic reaches of the Damlayik the sense of sin oppressed 
her heavily. 

But these were only minor complications. For several min- 
utes at a time she was perfectly ready to nurse the thought 
that she would fly the mountain with Gonzague and await 
the steamer in the little house beside the alcohol factory. Then, 
in the very next instant, it all seemed too fantastically impos- 
sible. It would need the most resolute courage to risk so Bnal 
an adventure, even if she avoided death in the process. Would 
it not really perhaps be better to wait and see what happened 
on Musa Dagh than to find oneself suddenly left in Beirut? 
The thought of the long climb in the night, of the dangerous 
business of crossing the Turkish plain of the Orontes, of the 
sea-voyage among the casks of alcohol, the threat of sub- 
marines— the prospect of all these dangers and fatigues en- 
tangled itself into what, in the circumstances, was a merely 
ridiculous feeling of propriety; “Ca ne se fait pas." 

But what was all that, compared to the pain of losing Ste- 
phan? She kept dear of him nowadays. She had ceased to 
make sure he washed and was properly fed. She no Johger, 
even at night, according to the sacred custom of mothers, came 
to his bed in the sheikh tent, to see that he was settling down 

497 



properly. All these omissions, these neglects, were summed 
up in a prudishly guilty feeling,t which weighed most heavily 
on her for Stephan’s sake. And, laden with all this guilt, she 
had come to Gabriel, to be frank, to say good-bye. 

They eyed one another, the wife and husband. The husband, 
as it seemed to him, saw a face which looked at once elderly 
and dissipated. He fancied he caught a shimmer of white upon 
the temples. All the less, therefore, could he understand these 
sparkling eyes, this mouth, which seemed to be so much big- 
ger, with chapped, swollen-looking bps. “She’s going to bits, 
with this life,” he thought. “What else could one expect.^’’ 
And though, not so very long before, he had had the impulse 
to tell Juliette about Iskuhi, he abandoned it now. What good 
would it be? How many days have we still before us? 

The wife saw a lined, distorted face, every feature different, 
framed in one of the round, untidy beards which she couldn’t 
abide. Each time she saw it, she had to ask herself: “Can this 
oriental bandit really be Gabriel?” And yet the voice was still 
Gabriel’s voice. Might she not surely have been faithful to it? 

Thoughts buzzed through her head; “I’ll stay, I’ll go, stay, 
go,” But her heart was moaning: “Oh, if it were only all over!” 

Their talk swerved neatly off its dangerous track. Gabriel 
described the favourable prospects of the near future. Most 
probably they’d a long rest to look forward to. He emphati- 
cally repeated Altouni’s very good advice: “Lie in bed and read, 
read, read,” A swath of smoke from the great blaze drifted 
heavily across her vision. They had to pass through resinous, 
sharply fragrant wood-smoke. 

Gabriel stopped. “How one smells the resin! This fire’s been 
a good thing, for several reasons. Even the smoke. It disinfects. 
Unluckily we’ve already twenty people lying m the isolation- 
wood, infected by that blasted deserter from Aleppo.” 

He could manage to talk of nothing but public events. So 
he was too indifferent to feel anything of what her silence 
had tried to express to him! . . . “I’m going. I’m going. I’m 

*498 



going"— it kept sounding in her ears, like a roaring seashelL 
Then, in the very midst of a smoke-swath, Juliette turned 
pale and lurched, so that he was forced to hold her up. 
His touch, a thousand times familiar, pulsed through her body 
like an anguish. She could just manage to turn her face to 
him. 

“Forgive me, Gabriel, but I think I’m . . . I’m going to be 
ill. ... Or I am already.” 

Gonzague Makis was already waiting for Juliette, at the place 
on “the Riviera” which they had arranged. He waited, observ- 
ant and self-possessed, smoking his half-cigarette to the very 
end. Being an extremely thrifty soul, he had still twenty-five 
whole cigarettes. He never threw away the ends, but saved 
them up to use in his pipe. Like most people reared in shabby 
gentility, in a series of cheap litde boarding-schools, people with 
definite pretensions, who have never owned more than two 
suits at a time, Gonzague was a fanatic for economy. He used 
what he had to the last thread, the last bite or drop. 

When Juliette came towards him, in a curious, lurching 
stride, he sprang to his feet. His gallantry towards his mistress 
had not changed in the least since she became one, and the 
clear attentiveness in his eyes, under the closely slanting eye- 
brows, still remained, even though a glint of firm criticism in- 
tensified it. 

He at once noticed her defeat. “So again you’ve not 
spoken.” 

She sat down beside him without answering. What could be 
the matter with her eyes? Everything, even the closest sur- 
rotmdings, was being tossed on a noiseless storm, or veiled 
in rain. As the fog' cleared, palms began growing out of the 
sea. Camels, with disapproving, averted faces, walked in pro- 
cession across the waves. Never before had the surf bdow 
beaten so noisily or seemed so near. You simply couldn’t hear 
yourself speak. And Gonzague’s voice came bom far away. 

499 



*All is no good, Julietxe. You’ve had days to do it 
The steamer won’t wait for us, and the manager won’t hel^ us 
a second time. We must leave tonight. Do try and be reason* 
able." 

She hid her breasts with her clenched fists, and leaned for- 
ward, as though to master a stubborn pain. “Why are you so 
cold with me, Gonzague? Why won’t you ever look at me? 
Do look!’’ 

He did just the opposite: he looked far out to sea, to let her 
feel he was annoyed. “I always used to imagine, Juliette, that 
you were a plucky, determined kmd of woman, and not senti- 
mental.” 

“P I’m not what I was. I’m already dead. Leave me here. 
Go by yourself.” 

She expected a protest. But he said nothing. These silences, 
which renounced her so easily, were more than Juliette could 
bear. She whispered, in a very subdued voice: “I’ll come with 
you— tonight.” 

Only then did he lightly caress her knee. “You must pull 
yourself together, Juliette, and get over all these scruples and 
hindrances. You’ve got to cut loose. It’s the only way. Let’s 
get it all clear, and not deceive ourselves. There’s nothing else 
to be done. You’ll have, somehow, to tell Bagradian. I’m not 
suggesting in the least that you’ll need to make a general con- 
fession. This is our chance, and we shan’t get another. That 
explains the whole thing. You can’t just — vanish. Quite apart 
from the fact that it would be so incredibly mean, how would 
you live? Have you thought of that?” 

And so, with ail the steadiness and certainty of his voice and 
manner, he kept persuading her that Bagradian would be 
bound to make what arrangements he could, to assure her im- 
mediate well-being. There was not a hint of vulgar adventure 
in what he said, though he frankly reckoned on Gabriel’s, and 
perhaps Stephan’s, imminent death. (As Juliette saw, he was 
perfectly willing, if she insisted, even to encumber hiirniflf with 

500 



Stt^phai^ dioUj^ it wotdd certainly complicate thdr escape.) 

As he came to the end, he grew impatient, since their la$t« 
precious hours were now on the wane. And how many times 
had he not had it all to say before? Had Juhette been able 
to think, she would have had to admit the justice of every 
word. But, for the last few days, the most casually heard, or 
thought, words or expressions had clung like leeches ta her 
brain, obstinately refusing to be pulled off. Now she heard 
the words: “How would you live?” The loud “hve” blared 
in her mind incessantly, as the needle on a worn-out phono- 
graph record sticks and repeats the same maddening notes. 
Incredible mists kept rising out of the earth, as though they 
had been sitting beside a swamp. She herself had become a 
worn-out phonograph record, and the needle stuck. 

“How should 1 live, how should I live, how should I live, in 
Barut, Beirut. . . . What for?” 

Gonzague took pity on Juhette, whom, as he imagined, her 
conscience tormented. He wished to help her. “You shouldn’t 
take It so badly, Juliette. Only think what it means! You’ll be 
saved! If you like. I’ll be with you— -but not if you don’t.” 

As he was saying that, she could see the sick boy from 
Aleppo, the deserter, over whose mangy, red-spotted chest she 
had bent a few days ago in such an exalted wave of despair- 
ing emotion. She must really go and see her mother. Maman 
was living in a hotel. A long corridor, with hundreds and 
hundreds of doors. And Juliette had forgotten the num- 
ber. ... 

Now Gonzague’s voice was tender and charming. It was 
doing her good. “I shall be with you.” 

“Will you? Are you with me now, Gonzague?” 

Amiably, he became matter-of-fact. “Now, listen carefully, 
Juliette. Tonight I shall wait about for you here. You must 
be ready by about ten. If you need me sooner— let’s suppose 
Bagradian wants to speak to me— send someone along. I’ll 
help you. You can easily bring your big suitcase. I shall manage 

501 



to carry it. . . . Be careful how you choose your things. But 
you’ll ^ able to buy anything in Beirut.” 

She had really bcra doing her best to understand him. She 
began repeating it, like a d^d: “Tonight, about ten. . . . I’m 
to bring a suitcase. ... I can get anything in Beirut. . . . 
And you? . . . How long will you stay with me?” 

These vague mutterings, at so decisive an hoiur, exhausted 
his padence. “Juliette, I loathe the words ‘for ever’ and ‘al- 
ways’ . . .” 

She gazed devoutly at him. Her cheeks flamed. Her half- 
open lips pouted out. It was as though she had just opened the 
right door. Gonzague was sitdng at the piano, strummi ng the 
mtttchtche he had played the night the sapdehs came. He’d 
said to her: “There are only moments.” 

It filled her with profound hilarity. “No, don’t say ‘always’ 
or ‘for ever.’ Just think of the momenti” 

Now she could understand, with an indescribable super- 
clarity, that there are only moments— that, tonight, the 
steamer, the suitcase, Beirut, her decision, had really not the 
slightest meaning for her; that impenetrable solitude was await- 
ing her, into which neither Gonzague nor Gabriel would find 
a way, a solitude full to the brim of home-comings, in which 
it would all be setded and cancelled out. The happiness of it 
came rushing m on her, filled her with strength. The amav-pH 
Gonzague had no longer a shattered woman to deal with, a 
woman driven into a corner— he had the chStelaine of Yog- 
honoluk, more beautiful than ever before. He took Juliette in 
his arms. It might have been for the first time. 

Her head toppled strangely from shoulder to shoulder. But 
he paid no heed. And the meaningless words which she 
seemed to mutter in dreamy esetasy passed his ears unheard. 

Until the men came where she could look at them, Sato still 
did not know what was going to happen. She was on guard 
a few yards away from the adultery, but was feding too empty, 

503 



too morose, to crawl in through the bu^es and view the pair. 

, . . Yes, i£ she could only have worked it up a bit! How 
pleased old Nunik would have been with her; what thanks 
and pence she might have earned! But Sato was caught! Sato 
was no longer allowed to take profitable messages to the val- 
ley, and bring them back from the valley to the mountain. 
All the more corrosive, therefore, her jealousy, the one cogent 
emotion she still possessed. To get Iskuhi away from the 
effendi! To pay the effendi back! She lay, with her knees 
drawn up under her, staring at the smoky sky. 

Then came the men. They came on slowly. Sato perceived 
the Leaders of the Council— Ter Haigasun, Bagradian Effendi, 
Pastor Aram. After these, the mukhtar Thomas Kebussyan, 
Teacher Oskanian, and some village elders of Bitias. The elect 
had only just iimshed a short, but very serious conversation, 
and seemed depressed. They had every reason to be so. The 
food situation was very grave. The herds had not diminished 
"according to plan,” but by the unknown law of some wild 
progression of ever-diminishing returns. Rations were bang 
cut down every day. Yet that did nothing to check the dwin- 
dling supplies, for which bad fodder seemed responsible. In 
spite of all Tomasian’s efforts, his fishery made no headway. 
And this new, contagious fever in camp was beginning to 
take alarming forms. Only yesterday four fever patients in 
the isolation-wood had died. Dr. Bedros Altouni could scarcely 
move on his weak little 1^, crooked with age. Over fifty 
wounded lay in and around the hospital-hut, and at least as 
many in the log huts, all without drugs or proper bandages, 
left to their own devices, or God’s. Worst of all, this growmg 
exasperation, an unforeseen result of victory, which had taken 
such a hold on all men. No doubt the cruel heat of the burmng 
countryside, this itching cold in the head produced by pine- 
smoke, the over-fatigue, had all contributed— and the eternal 
meat. Its deepest cause was the fact that life up here was in- 
supportable. In the last few days, apart from the Kilikian in- 

503 



ddeat, there had been many brawls, and knives had been usc^ 

Today all this impelled the leaders to give more attention 
than they had to the seacoast side of the Damlayik. Up on the 
"Dish Terrace,” which stood far removed from all these hap- 
penings, there fluttered the great signal; “Christians in Need.” 
Two scouts of the cohort of youth were continually on duty 
beneath it, scanning the sea for passing ships. It seemed likely 
that some undependable lad had overlooked one ship, or 
several, since not even a fishing-smack had been sighted, and 
this in August, at a time when, as a rule, the Bay of Suedia is 
covered with this kind of petty craft. Did God really intend 
to let the sea become a desert, merely to take from his Chris- 
tians on Musa Dagh what slight hope they still had of sur- ' 
vival? The Council had decided to strengthen this look-out, 
and recondition it. The watch on the “Dish Terrace” was 
henceforth to be kept by grown-up men. At some jutting 
point, farther south, a second would have to be cstabhshed. 
The leaders had come out today to setde on the likeliest pro- 
montory. 

At first the soft crop-grass of this highland muffled, even for 
Sato, the men’s approach. When she twisted round on her 
side, they were fairly near her. She was up in a flash — some- 
thing sprang to life inside her — and waving wild arms in their 
direction. At first they paid no attention. Whenever Sato made 
her presence known, in any group, it was the same. All eyes 
would seem not to have nooced her, all heads would be 
slightly averted, in a kind of severe, shamefaced discomfort., 
Sato was an “untouchable”; all who encountered her felt the 
same, though, to the Christian, all God’s creatures are, by 
birthright, equal in His eyes. Today these serious men, full of 
care and business, saw, without having seen, this waving half- 
wit, and went calmly on. But the last of them, Thomas Kebus- 
syan, suddenly stopped and turned round to Sato. Her con- 
quest had so definite an effect on all the others that they, too, 
halted, as by a spell, and eyed the sign-giver. So much at least, 

504 



her strength had achieved. The leaders stood as if bewitched, 
eyeing the repulsive little creature, since now she pranced 
about like an evil thing under unclean influence. Sato’s eyes 
sparkled, her spindle-legs, beneath that once so maidenly little 
&tx;k, twitched with excitement The contorted mouth, such 
a mouth as only deaf-mutes usually show, was domg its best 
to jabber words; the wavii^ arms kept pointing again and 
again, into the myrtle bushes. The suggestion given by ail 
this gradually disarmed these men’s resistance. They came al- 
most up to Sato, and Ter Haigasun grumpily inquired what 
she was doing here and what she had to teU them. Her sallow 
gipsy-face grimaced and twitched. She blinked in tortured 
desperation as though it were impossible to reply. All the more 
eagerly she continued her urgent pointings, towards the sea. 
The men looked at one another. The same questioning thought 
was in all their minds: "A warship?” Little as they cared to 
have to do with this misbegotten ape of sinfulness, everyone 
on the Damlayik was aware what a keen pair of eyes Sato had. 
Perhaps those repulsive lynx-eyes had discovered a tiny thread 
of smoke, away on the farthest horizon, where no one else 
could have managed to see it. 

Ter Haigasun gave her a httle prod with his stick and told 
her curtly: “Go onl Lead the way* Show us what you’ve seen.” 

She went hopping proudly, started to run, stopped from 
time to time to beckon the men. Sometimes she put her hand 
to her mouth, imploring them not to talk, or even make a 
noise with their feet. And now, full of a strange excitement, 
they all obeyed her and held their tongues. All walked 
cautiously, on tiptoe, suddenly fallen under the influence of 
this litde guide and their own deep curiosity. On, past box 
and arbutus, they came into the mass of thick-leaved shrubbery 
which, in a broad belt, forms the frontier of the coastside of 
Musa Dagh. There were many gaps through the dark, cool 
undergrowth, corridors, intertwimng lanes. A stream ran in 
and out among it, to fall in cascading swaths over the cliff. 

505 



Sfitt suid there a pine or rock wrapped rouod ut cre^jKar 
up out of the cojifusion. Nothing else suggested a wSd 
mountain s umm it. In many cascs It almost gave the unjuret*' 
sion o^an artificial maze in some southern garden. On his 
many Krategic excursions in those early, preparatory weeks, 
Gabriel had scarcely visited this paradisial belt of the Damlayik. 
Yet, cool and refreshing as it was, he followed now, at the 
tail of the group, with a sensation of heavy discomfort^ on 
legs which seemed to resist every step he took. 

Sato had picked so artful a way through the undergrowth 
that the men all suddenly found they had emerged on the 
clearing most favoured by these lovers, a litde open space 
fronting the sea. Sheer amazement, like a blade of descending 
lightning, bewildered Juhette and Gonzague, who had fancied 
tiuunselves more hidden than ever before. One of those eternal 
uneasy moments began, whose acute discomfort anyone who 
has had, as a victim, to experience it will remember to the end 
of his days, with only the burning wish he had not been there. 
Gabriel arrived in the tuck of time to see Maris spring up and 
swiftly put his clothes in order. Juliette sat on motionless, with 
bare shoulders and hanging hair, her fingers, right and lef^ 
digging into the ground. She stared like a blind woman c* 
Gabriel, seeing him, not with her eyes, but with all her 
senses. The event passed in complete silence. Gonzague, who 
had retreated a few steps, followed these proceedings with the 
victorious and precise smile of a fencer. The strangers. Ter 
Haigasun first of all, having turned their backs on the woman, 
stood rigidly staring, as though they were finding it impossible 
to bear their own ^ame another instant. The Armenian 
people, between the Caucasus and Lebanon, are implacably 
chaste. Hot-blooded people are always inclined towards 
severity, only the tepid are easy-going. These people esteemed 
no sacrament so highly as marriage, and looked down disdain- 
fully on the lax polygamy of Islam. The men who now turned 

506 



badcs in shame would probably not have hindered 
Bagradian, had he ended the business once and for all with a 
revolver bullet. Certainly Ter Haigasun would not, nor the 
Pastor, though he had lived three years in Switzerlaad But 
Hrand Oskanian stood leaning forwards over his rine, not 
moving an inch. It looked as though that gipsy-faced teacher 
were about to thrust the barrel into his mouth, as though his 
eyes only sought the right minute to pull the trigger. He had 
good reason for this symbolic posture. The madonna of his 
only prayer had degraded herself for ever in his eyes. 

The unapproachable backs of the men were expectant. But 
nothing happened. No shot from Bagradian’s army-revolver. 
When, after a while, they could turn their faces back to this 
reality, they saw Gabriel take the cowering woman’s hands 
and help her up. Juhette tried to walk, but her feet refused. 
Bagradian supported her under the elbows and led her away 
between the myrtle bushes, as one leads a child. 

The men, with unforgivmg eyes, watched this incredible 
proceeding. Ter Haigasun growled a few short words at them 
and, slowly, each by himself, they left the place. Sato scampered 
around the priest, as though that supreme head of the people 
owed her a reward for her useful services. 

Not another look was cast at the stranger, who stayed on 
alone. 

No people can manage to live without admiration, and just as 
little without having something to hate. Hate had long beCn 
brewing in the encampment. All it had needed had been an 
object. Hate against the Turks and government.? That was 
too vast a target to appease; it was only there as space or time 
are ever-present in human consciousness, as the first condition 
of all living. Hate against one’s immediate neighbours ? Whom 
could such daily jars and bickerings satisfy? Not even the 
chiding women themselves. So that the flood which, in spite 

507 



of bloody slaughter and many rigorous privations, had col' 
lected in the hearts of these people had to find another channd 
for itself. 

Before the men vacated that painful ground. Ter Haigasun 
had shouted a few curt words to them. These words contained 
the admonition to keep what had happened a close secret, since 
the priest ail too clearly foresaw the repulsive sequel, should 
this scandal reach the ears of the Town Enclosure. Ter Haiga- 
sun had warned men, but not husbands. Mukhtar Thomas 
Kebussyan, in spite of all his inflated dignity in public, was 
both uxorious and henpecked. An organic necessity to supply 
his stronger-minded mate with as much gossip as he could find 
for her was so compelling a part of his nature that he ran 
straight home, to lay this jewel, with many imploring admoni- 
tions to silence, at his wife’s* feet Madame Kebussyan had 
scarcely heard him out before, with a scarlet face, she flung a 
shawl about her shoulders and ran forth from the mayoral 
residence to seek the huts of the other mukhtars’ wives, those 
ladies “of the best society” whom she, within certain hmits, 
patronized. 

Sato took charge of all the rest. It was her threefold triumph. 
First, she had done somethmg to the eifendi, from which he 
would not easily recover. Second, having stirred this hell- 
broth, she had now a perfect right to regard herself as the 
highly considered and useful member of a virtuous, order- 
loving community. Third, she had first-hand information. It 
was the least deceptive of her assets. 

She began by enticing a few over-developed schoolgirls with ' 
her racy suggestions of “knowing a thing or two.” They were 
joined by others. Sato was a born journalist. She eked out her 
“story” to its limits, and soon had the never-experienced thrill 
of finding herself the centre of attraction. Finally, in the 
coarsest words, used to form the ugliest pictures, Stephan heard 
of his mother’s shame. At first he could not realize what it all 
meant. Maman stood far too high for Sato and her mob even 

508 



to mean her when they used her name. Maman (as recently 
Iskuhi) was a veiled g^de^ in Stephan’s eyes. Stephan grew 
more and more bewildered as the rabble surrounded him with 
its gibes and Sato kept jabbering out fresh nuances. Suddenly 
she had lost her throaty stutter and was talking with the 
fluency of an expert. Just as &ilure benefits the soul, so is 
success good for the body, so that these few minutes of 
heightened consciousness tnumpcd over Sato’s speech defect. 
Stephan’s big eyes widened. He had nothing to say. 

But then it needed only a second for him to throw himself 
straight on the spy and punch her head, so hard that blood 
streamed out of her mouth and nose. He had done her no 
serious harm; for a while her nose bled. But Sato, like all 
primitives, could get far more woefully panicked by blood, 
was more terrified of jt, than the developed. She let out long, 
terrific howls, as though she were at least being massacred. 
And now the tables were turned. A cynic would have re- 
joiced to see it. Sato, the jackal, the waif on the edge, the 
“stinker,” the pariah cur, had in a trice become the object 
of universal sympathy and concern. Hypocritical voices were 
being raised: “He’s hit a girl.” And so a long suppressed dis- 
like of foreigners, of stuck-up outsiders, could be released. 
That kingly rank, silently accorded the Bagradians for a few 
hours after every repelled attack, was forgotten. All that re- 
mained was the deeper hatred of people who “don’t belong.” 
The boys, with murderous, twisted faces, all set upon Stephan, 
and there followed a fight that was half a chase, from the 
Town Enclosure to the altar square. Hagop kept pluckily 
with Stephan. He hopped in, with wide, angry leaps, again and 
again, between his friend and his pursuers. Haik was not 
there to prove how he really felt towards the Bagradians. That 
Aleppo runner was spending his last hours on the Damlayik, 
alone with his mother, the widow Shushik. Stephan, though 
he fled before the pack, was stronger and bigger than most. 
When two of them hung on his arms, he shook them off, as a 

509 



heat shakes hounds. A toriUe pain seemed to ehste 
him. ... ‘1 can never go home again.” 

This children’s brawl only ended what the mukhtars’ wive^ 
headed by Madame Kebussyan, had begun. Before sundown 
the communes knew everything. They “knew everything” 
with a number of embelhshments, designed to make them 
more virtuously indignant. It was the hour at which, for 
some atmospheric reason, smoke from the mountain fire rose 
thickest. In black layers it swathed the Town Enclosure, giv- 
ing forth a sharp, acrid resin, exacerbating throats and mucous 
membranes. Sneezings, snufflings, hawkings, became an agony. 

. . . What? Was it really possible? Could these people, just 
two days clear of death, these people, almost certain, sooner 
or later, not to escape death’s clutches a second time — could 
they, m their present desperate phght, be so concerned with 
a piece of scandal, and one in which the protagonists were 
foreigners? 

There is only one answer. They were foreigners, Gabriel’s 
leadership had changed everything. The queen, the king’s 
consort in a monarchy, is, as a foreigner, doubly blamed and 
called to account with double severity. Juliette had not sinned 
merely against her husband, but against the whole of his race; 

So that, two days after the fiercest of these battles, which 
had bereaved over a hundred families, groups of outraged 
people stood round the altar, as though, for them, huddled 
on their raft in waves of blood, there could be no more im- 
portant topic than the shame and scandal of the Bagradians^ 
It was not the very old women who set the tone of this in- 
dignation, nor the very young. It was women of the matronly 
sort, between the ages of thirty-five and fifty-five, who in the 
East seem far older than they are, and whose sole r emaining 
pleasure in life is the contemplation of others’ joys and the 
acrid discussion of them. The young women kept fairly quiet 
and listened reflectively to the virtuous scoldings of these dect 

510 



l%iae yo^g wtmien were dl very pale, ft was on tlnni thitt 
1& on the D^layik weighed heaviest. Their faces, under caps 
or head-shawls, were drawn and ansemiolooking. Armenian 
women, even of the lowest class, are in their youth frail and 
delicaterlimbed. Grief, anxiety, and privations had moulded 
these youngest women on the Damlayik to an even more 
fragile, delicate form. They nodded sagely to the matrons’ 
chiding disapprobation, and only now and again put in a 
word. At the moment they could not feel too in^gnant at the 
thought of an adulterous woman, knowing as they did wl^ 
was in store for them and all their sisters. Not merely death, 
but death by rape, unless one had the extraordinary good luck 
to be bought by a rich Turk from the saptiehs, for his harem, 
where one would have to reckon on being slowly vexed to 
death, with petty persecutions, by the elder women. 

Madame Kebussyan had control of every thread of out- 
raged wrath. Now was her time to pay back the chatelaine 
of Yoghonoluk (who, to be sure, had shown her unfailing 
kindness) for all those unpleasant inferiority-feehngs experi- 
enced at evening receptions. And more — ^bere was the 
mayoress’s chance to re-establish her position as social leader 
of the district. She was far too wide-awake a lady to restrict 
her observations to adultery merely. Soon there was an even 
better, more nutritious subject for virtuous censure. She, the 
mayor’s wife, had seen the inside of that luxurious shakh- 
.pavilion, to which she had been invited again and again till 
she was sick of going there. More than once, with amazed, 
scandahzed eyes, had she watched “that woman” display her 
stores; her cupboards, her trunks, her chests, bursung with 
supplies. Nobody had any idea! Vast stores of rice, coflFec, 
raisin-cakes, tinned meat, smoked herrings, sardines. All the 
choicest European dainties, heaped up in that tent. No end to 
the sweets, the jams, the chocolate, the crystallized fruits and 
— above all— the loaves of finest flour, biscuits, and cakes! 

It cannot be denied that such graphic descriptions had their 

511 



sfiect OQ the nagging bellies of the males. Otherwise they 
direaed their indignation against Gonzague Maris, rather than 
Juliette. Against the foreigner, the interloper. It would not 
have needed very much more to make a few young men get 
together and agree to shoot the adulterer out of hand. 

When Ter Haigasun came into the square, Madame Kebus- 
syan planted herself in front of him. “Priest, you’ll have to 
punish them I” 

He tried to thrust her aside. “Mind your own business.” 

But, more and more shameless, she blocked his way. “This 
is my business. Priest. Haven’t I got two married daughters, 
and two daughters-in-law? You know that yourself I And 
aren’t men’s eyes greedier than the eyes of wild dogs^ And 
women’s hearts slyer sull? Everyone lives and sleeps in a 
heap, in the huts. How can mothers be expected to keep, order 
and discipline, with such an example^” 

Ter Haigasun gave her a htdc shove. “I haven’t the time to 
hear your foolishness. Get out of my way I” 

But this queen of tonguc-waggers, usually a most ordinary 
little woman, with nimble mouse-eyes, drew herself up, red as 
a peony with Juliette’s sin, to her full, solemn height. “And 
the sin. Priest? Christ the Savioui has kept death away from 
us so far. He’s fought on our side — ^He and the Holy Mother 
of God. But now they’ve been insulted, by mortal sin. Won’t 
they deliver us over to the Turks, unless there’s penance done?” 

Madame Kebussyan felt she had played her trump card. 
She glanced round victoriously. Her husband, Thomas, kept 
close beside the priest; his htde squinting eyes saw all and, 
nobody. He seemed anxious not to be drawn into all the fuss. 
Ter Haigasun did not answer the malicious woman directly, 
but the crowd, which was pressing in on all sides: 

“Yes, it’s true. Christ Saviour has preserved us, so far. And 
do you know how? By working the miracle, when we needed 
one, of sending us Gabriel Bagradian, a gallant officer, who 
knows and ’)7''A*"rstands war. Otherwise we’d have been fin- 

51a 



ished long ago. Those still alive have his brain and courage 
to thank. You’d better think of that, and of nothing else.” 

A FEW leaders had collected in Ter Haigasun’s hut. This was 
a private and very difficult case. Half-conscious delicacy had 
caused them to assemble here, instead of in the government 
barrack. Since this was a purely moral difficulty, and Ter 
Haigasun was invested with supreme autliority in such mat- 
ters, they entrusted to him without further discussion the busi- 
ness of deciding what to do. He named two messengers, Krikor 
and Bedros Altouni. The one was to go to Gonzague Maris, 
who had lived in his house, and whom he had, so to speak, 
brought to Yoghonoluk, the other — ^thc doctor — to Gabriel, 
as his oldest friend, and the protege of his family. 

Krikor was still crippled with rheumatism. But his brief 
excitement at the christening had done him more good than 
any of the drugs he still possessed. In the last few days he had 
managed to move about more freely, though with very slow, 
hobbling steps. Ter Haigasun had him routed out of his 
kennel, and curtly explained to him his errand. He was to find 
this foreign guest of his at once. Two orderlies of thd cohort of 
youth would do their best to help him discover the Greek. 
When he was found, Krikor must inform him plainly that it 
would he as much as his life was worth to come near the 
camp. He was to disappear as fast as possible. Krikor raised 
vehement objections. He was, he insisted, a chemist by earthly 
occupation, and not the porter of an inn — not a bouncer. 
Ter Haigasun gave only the laconic answer; “You brought 
him; now you must rid us of him.” 

So there was nothing else for it. Krikor, after many pro- 
tests, set forth on his unpleasant errand. As he hobbled, Sent 
over his stick, he rehearsed, in a series of tragic soliloquies, the 
most tactful words in which to discharge it. Bedros Hekim’s 
task was a much easier one. He was to warn Gabriel of the 
over-excited state of the pubhc mind, adding an elaborate re- 

513 



quest that Juliette Haoum should keep her tent £or die preseoL 

Whereas the others had listened silendy to Ter Haigasun'a 
instructions to Krikor and Bedros, one of the Qiundl, as a 
rule obstinately taciturn, raised his voice in an excited speecL 
So far, the sombre Hrand Oskanian had been generally 
thought of as ridiculous. His malicious vanity had been 
tolerated because he was known, as a competent schoolteacher. 
He revealed himself now as a fiery fanatic. Such a wild 
strength was in his words that they all stared at him in amaze* 
ment. Oskanian urged dire vengeance on Gonzague. Thq^ 
must first take away the blackguard’s American passport and 
tesker^, and then strip him. They must tic his hands and feet 
and get some plucky fellows to carry him down to the valley, 
that night, so that the Turks might mistake him hir an 
Armenian and kill him by inches! 

This crazy outburst was received in uncomfortable silence. 
But the teacher was not so easily put oti. He began, in all 
seriousness, to give reasons why the punishment he suggested 
was strictly necessary. 

Ter Haigasun heard his prolix utterances, not, as he usually 
did, with half-shut eyes, but with eyes fast closed. His hands 
took frosty refuge in his sleeves, always a clear sign of his 
displeasure, “Well, Teacher, is that all?” 

“No, it isn’t. And I’m not gomg to stop till you see the 
truth as plainly as I do.” 

Ter Haigasun jerked his head uneasily, as though to scare 
away a humming gnat. “I think we’ve said all we need say in 
the matter.” 

Oskanian foamed. “Does the Council of Leaders intend to 
let this blackguard go with its blessing? So that tomorrow he 
may betray us to the Turks?” 

Ter Haigasun stared up wearily at the leafy roof of the hut^ 
which the wind rustled. “Even if he wants to betray us, what 
can he tell them?” 

“What can he tell them? Everything! The pnsiHnn of the 

514 



Town Enclosure. The pastiure grounds. The trenches. The bad 
state of our supplies. The infection ” 

Ter Haigasun cut him short, wearily: “None of that will 
be any use to the Turks. Do you really imagine they’re so 
stupid that diey don’t know all that by this time? . . . And 
besides, that young man isn’t a traitor.” 

The others .all agreed with the priest. But Hrand Oskanian 
shot out his fist, as though to hold an escaping victim. Tve 
made a suggestion,” he cackled, “and I demand that you put 
it to the vote, in the usual way.” 

The priest’s waxen face took on some colour. “Any gossip- 
ing fool can make suggestions. But it rests simply and solely 
with me to have them put to the vote. 1 don’t put unnecessary- 
suggestions to the vote. Remember that. Teacher! And there’s 
nob^y here who wouldn’t consider this mad and debased. 
Let anyone who doesn’t hold up his hand.” 

Not a hand moved. The priest nodded his dismissal. “So 
that’s enough, once and for all. Do you understand me?” 

The defeated teacher stood up in all the dwarfish pride of his 
inches. He pointed in the direction of the camp. "Our people 
out there take a different view of it.” 

If Oskanian’s behaviour had so far merely disgusted the 
priest, this demagogic remark made him suddenly furious. His 
eyes glinted to sudden flame. But he controlled himself. “The 
Council’s duty is to guide popular feeling, not be led by it” 

Hrand Oskanian nodded with all the resignation of a 
Cassandra. “You’ll live to remember what I say.” 

Ter Haigasun’s hds dropped over his eyes again. His voice 
was very quiet indeed. “I most urgently recommend you, 
Teacher Oskanian, not to warn us, but to warn yourself.” 

In this highly uneasy atmosphere they awaited the return of 
their messengers. It was a very long time before they came. 
The crippled chemist was back earlier than the doctor. He 
was half dead with- pain, and had to lie down on Ter Haiga- 
sun’s couch. He groaned, and only when the pnest had made 

5*5 



Kim take two deep swigs out o£ his raki flask, had he strength 
to report. Gonzague Maris had forestalled his mission and in- 
tend^ to leave the mountain that same night. He would only 
wait till a certam hour, to give his mistress her chance of 
escaping with him. The chemist had been most impressed by 
his former guest’s gentlemanly attitude. Gonzague had be* 
haved with distinction. He had not only made Krikor a present 
of every scrap of print he possessed, but assured him that, 
whenever he got the chance, he would do his best for the 
persecuted people on Musa Dagh. Ter Haigasun waved 
aside the sinner’s promise, with a litde gesture of dismissal. 
It was already dark by the time the other messenger returned. 
Bedros Altouni, too, looked exhausted as he came into the 
presbytery-hut. He, too, sank down, and began to rub his 
crooked little legs. ‘The old man stared and at first said noth- 
ing, and Ter Haigasun had some trouble in making him speak. 
What he said was not reassuring, and he growled so low 
that his sharp litde voice could scarcely be heard: “Poor 
woman ” 

These words amazed the mukhtar Kebussyan. His bald, 
shiny head rocked to and fro as he thought of his censorious 
spouse: “What do you mean, poor woman? She’s rich 

Bedros Hekim’s eyes scorched the mukhtar. "What do I 
mean? I mean that, for at least three days, she’s been in high 
fever. I mean she’s delirious. I mean she’ll most probably die. 
I mean that she’s been infected in the hospital-hut. I mean 
I’m sorry for her. . . . Damn it all, I mean— I mean it wasn’jt 
her fault; it was simply her illness. I mean . . .’’ 

Gabrisl had half guided, half carried Juliette most of the way 
back to the hut. There, she fell over the bed, unconscious, with 
turned-up eyes. He tried to bring her round. All that was 
left of scent on her litde dressing-table he sprinkled on her 
forehead and lips. He shook her, he chafed her temples. Her 
happy soul hid, far away from him, in the farthest regions of 

516 



its oblivion. Fever had cooked £or days in Juliette’s blood. Bu^ 
in these last hours, it must have shot up like a tropical plant. 
Her skin looked raw and inflamed. Like parched eai^ it 
sucked in every drop of nioisture. Her brctdi came qmdtcr 
and quicker. This life seemed to be rushing towards its end. 

Since he could not rouse her, Gabriel bent over Juliette and, 
hoping that, free of her clothes, she would come to herself, 
began to undress her. He tore her frock and her shift. He sat 
down on the end of the bed and took her feet upon his knee. 
They were heavy and swollen, so that he found it hard to free 
them of shoes and stocking. He never even noticed the 
absence in him of any of those painful emotions which, it is 
said, such an experience should engender. No pain of outraged 
susceptibilities, no distressing thought that these feverish limbs 
had been another man’s pleasure an hour ago. Not even the 
frigid, hopeless consciousness that the troth of a lifetime had 
been broken. He felt benumbed, but only with pity h>r 
Juliette. 

Gabriel felt no surprise. It seemed as though this fate were 
his own contriving. Incredible as that might sound, it was 
precisely juhette’s infidelity, followed by her collapse which 
brought them together again after they had been so long apart. 
Only now that this pitiful body had strayed so far in its 
hostility that it gave itself to another man, did he, wistfully, 
remember. Full of the most anxious tenderness, his clumsy 
fingers tugged and nestled among these clothes, which resisted 
so stubbornly. He stood looking down at the white body while 
a hundred thoughts and sensibilities sprang up, half foimed, 
to vanish in nothing. 

What had happened? In the corner of the tent he noticed 
the bucket of spring watei' which always stood there. He 
dipped in handkerchiefs, to lay compresses. It was not easy. 
Her rigid body was hard to lift. Gabriel thought of calling 
one of her maids, who now, since their mistress had grown 
so vague, and had, moreover, almost ceased to revrard them, 

517 



came on duty now aod then. But shaxxie |)rev«oeed 
He must be aloncv now. 

When the old doctor came, he found Bagradian ataaog 
Vilely at the unconscious Juhette. Bedros, at a first glanov 
doubt^ if she really were unconscious, or half pretending. 
His second showed him how feverish she was. The usual 
clinical picture of this epidemic. Sudden rise of temperature, 
and unconsaousness, which usually came at the end of a 
fairly long period of scarcely noticed lU-health. He lifted the 
patient upright. She showed immediate signs of vomiung and 
didicult breathing. It was obvious. But, when he examined 
the skin of her breast and loins, where usually there were most 
signs of infection, he found only three or four small red spots. 

The doctor would have asked Gabriel to leave the tent and 
not come back. He said nothing. He had noticed Gabriel’s 
eyes, shadowed and shrunk far back into their sockets. Nor did 
he deliver himself of his message, or dwell on the moral un- 
rest of the Town Enclosure. On the other hand, he asked to 
be shown the medicine-chest, which Juliette had had pre- 
pared before their departure for the East. It was a big chest, 
but now three-quarters empty. Most of its contents she had 
sent to the hospital. The old man pressed a tiny flask into 
Gabriel’s hand, who was still quite dazed. This, in case the 
pulse should begin to get faint. His wife would be in to- 
morrow and help to nurse. Gabriel wasn’t to worry about 
Juliette’s unconsciousness or delirium. It was the natural re- 
sult of her temperature. And, as things were, it was a blessing. 
She had an even chance of life or death. The greatest danger 
would only come when she’d got the poison out of her system. 
Then the fever dropped with a sudden rush, and, in many 
cases, took the heart along with it. Bedros dipped a glass in 
a bucket, looked about for a spoon, and tried, with an expert 
hand, to force a few drops between Juliette’s lips. This one. 
practised gesture was qmte enough to confound the ly ing self- 
mistrust which made him call himself “a shaky incompetent.” 

518 



'**Ydll'inust keep cm making her diink,” he instnitited 
Gabriel, "evm if she doesn’t come to herself.” 

Juliette’s husband only nodded. 

The doctor peered about, round the narrow tent. ’‘Some- 
body’ll have to stay up with her.” 

Since by now it was fairly dark, he lit the oilJamp. Then 
he took Bagradian’s hand. “Well, it'd be something, wouldn’t 
it, if the Turks attacked again tonight?” 

Gabriel did his best to smile. “We’ve set Musa Dagh on fire. 
They won’t.” 

“No.” Altouni’s sharp little voice had a note in it of pro- 
found disappointment. ‘Tity!” 

He went, bowed with years and inhuman labours, without 
one word of direct sympathy to this man whom he had helped 
bring into the world. All words, the good and the bad, had 
long seemed worn out and useless. Gabriel meant to go some 
of the way with him, to get fi-esh air. But he turned back at 
the curtain of the tent. Had the Turks chosen that minute 
to begin an attack on all his trenches, Gabriel could scarcely 
have managed to force himself to come out of the dark. He 
lay down, opposite Juliette’s bed, on the divan. Never, he sup- 
posed, in aU his life had he been tired until today. These 
three battles, with all their bloodshed, all the sleepless nights, 
the eternal backwards and forwards, from observation post to 
trench— each of these monstrous days on Musa Dagh hung on 
him, like a gnome with a clay face, stupidly heavier, heavier, 
every second. It was the tiredness which feels too tired to 
care about the horror of reahty. A dull, unrefreshing sleep 
invited him to fall into its pit. Gabriel grew aware of Iskuhi’s 
presence as he lay there, deep within this hollow. He tu^ed 
himself out of it with great difficulty, and sprang to his feet 

“You can’t stay here, Iskuhil Not one second. We can’t see 
each other any more.” 

Her eyes were wide and angry. “And if you get illr-am 1 
not to be ill, too?” 



"But what about Hovsannah and the baby?” 

She went to the bed and laid the palms of her hands on 
Juliette’s shoulders. In this position she turned to GabrieL 
“There! Now I can’t go back into our tent. I can’t touch 
Hovsannah again, or the baby either.” 

He tried to draw her away. “What will Aram Tomasian 
say to that? No! I can’t answer to him for it, Iskuhi. Go 
along, Iskuhi, for your brother’s sake.” 

She bent over the patient’s unconscious face. It was becom- 
ing more restless every instant. “Why do you send me away? 
If it’s to happen, it has already! My brother? None of that 
matters to me now.” 

He stole up, uncertainly, behind her. “You oughtn’t to have 
done that, Iskuhi.” 

Her face seemed, almost avidly, to mock. “P Who am I? 
You’re the leader. If you get ill, that’s the end of all of us.” 

She wiped the patient’s bps with her handkerchief. “When 
we first came from Zeitun, Juliette was so kind, so wonderful 
to me. I have a duty towards her, if I’m able to do it. Can’t 
you see that?” 

He buried his lips in her hair. But she caught him to her, 
with all her strength. “It’ll all soon be over. And I’m not 
going to lose you; I want to have been with you!” 

It was the first open expression of Iskuhi’s love. They held 
each other as close as though a corpse had lain beside them, 
who knew no more. But the corpse was not dead. She was 
breathing heavily. Sometimes a httle moan forced its way out 
of her swollen throat. Was her voice seeking someone for, 
ever lost to her? Iskuhi let go of Gabriel. But his hands seemed 
still to be crying out for her. They had begun to talk the 
briefest commonplaces, for the sake of the unconscious Juliette. 

During the night Juliette had a spell of consciousness. She 
babbled wildly, and tried to sit up. What a long way she bad 
had to come back! Even so, she had not managed to reach 
the Damlayik, only the flat in the Avenue Kl&er. “Suzanne 

520 





What is it? . . . Am I ill? . . . I'm ill. ... I can't get 
up. . . . Why aren't you helping me?” 

She was demanding a service of her maid. Gabriel and 
Iskuhi helped the invalid, still in her Parisian bedroom. 
Juliette shivered all over. She moaned: “Cest bien. . . . Now 
perhaps I shall get to sleep. . . . It’s my angina again, Suzanne. 
... I don't think it'll be very much. . . . When my husband 
comes back, wake . . .” 

This mention of the former Bagradian, living so secure in 
Juliette's world, had its shattering effect on the present one. 
He dipped another cloth in water and renewed the compress 
round Juliette’s throat. He covered her up with the greatest 
care, whispering: “Yes, you must try to go to sleep, Juliette.” 

She answered something unintelhgible. It sounded hke the 
tiredest thanks, the most childish promise to be good, and get 
to sleep. Gabnel and Iskuhi sat in silence, hand in hand, 
very close, on the divan. But he never took his eyes off the 
patient. Life had developed a curious pattern. The unfaithful 
husband served his faithless wife — ^while he deceived her. 
Now Juliette seemed really asleep. 

Time was up. Gonzague Maris had made up his mind to 
wait no longer. He shook himself. The past’s the past! And 
yet it was not so easy as he had imagined to slip clear of this, 
the strangest week in his life. He was forced, in astonishment, 
to admit that a definite longing kept him back in it. Did he 
love Juliette more than he thought? Was it some guilty sensa- 
tion clouding his freedom^ In the last few days the woman 
had behaved unaccountably. Again and again her agony hid 
stirred his pity, roused a wish to help and protect her. And 
besides, it had ended so disastrously. As he thought of that 
ghasdy minute, he set his teeth, his controlled face became 
distorted. Must he, like any other seedy adventurer, submit to 
this end — ^this horrible breaking off? More than once he had 
left his hiding-place and come in the direction of Three-Tent 
Square— to see Bagradian, to fight for Juliette. And yet, each 

521 



little, lie turned badt. Not beca^ue he had^ietn s eowwi^ 
but rather, unaccountably uneasy. It was a feeling he had 
never experienced. 

“rve ceased to belong here.” Some strong; although in- 
visible rampart had, since those devastating minutes, bulk 
itself up between Gonzague and the whole world of Musa 
Dagh. It was scarcely possible any longer to force a way 
through the aerial ramparts that protected the Armenian 
mountain. And Juliette was on the o^cr side. Added to which 
came the exquisitely phrased suggestions of Apothecary Krikor, 
his former host Krikor had not once directly alluded to the 
painful subject of his mission. He had congratulated Gonzague 
on having an American passport; expressed regret at the fact 
that every earthly sojourn should be, of necessity, so transient 
Declared it to be the privilege of youth to keep on setting 
out with a light heart. Life does not become really depressing, 
till only one good-bye remains to be said. Maris had listened, 
with due attention, to the old gendeman’s practical philosophy, 
having grasped the casually hinted fact that every further 
minute spent on the Damlayik contained its perils for Krikor’s 
guest. And this consciousness of lurking danger intensified 
as the night wore on. The waning crescent moon stood direcdy 
over him. He had waited a full hour past the dmc arranged. 
He had lost Juliette. He went back again a few steps in the 
direcdon of the camp. He turned, his mind made up. 

Perhaps it was better this way. Slowly, with hngermg'care, 
he drew on his gloves. This finicking gesture, in the midst of 
a dark, oriental wilderness, might have struck a superior 
watcher as somewhat grotesque. But Gonzague only put on 
his gloves to protect his hands as he climbed down. He buckled 
his small suitcase on his back. As his habit was, whenever he 
left a house, he drew out a pocket-comb and arranged bis 
hair. The consciousness of having forgotten no thing , of not 
having left one unnoticed fragment of himself— his fresh and 
pleasant sensation of being “sJl right”— began to invade him, 

522 



Jii be isiutphid amo!^ 

and wild taagiudia, into the moonli^t, as though 
aot a wilderness lay before him, but a charming promenade. 
He .remembered having said to Juliette: ‘Tve got a good 
memory because I find it so easy to forget.” And indeed, with 
every fresh step southward^ his memories became fainter, his 
heart more free. He was already quickening his pace, in- 
quisitively turning towards a future which his passport and 
temperament made secure. The chalk cli& along the coast, 
hollowed out with incredibly black shadows, glittered like 
sharp snow-fields in the moon. The surf beat dully below him. 
As his path became harder to negotiate, Gonzague’s feet 
relidred each step. He enjoyed the controlled play of his 
muscles. . . . How incomprehensible people were! All this 
pain and slaughter, merely because they refused to let the 
impartial light have power in them, preferring their stupid, un- 
tidy obscurity. So simple, so easily mastered — these black-and- 
white regions of the moon. To feel oneself nothing; in the 
void. It was simply thatl Gonzaguc frowned. He felt some 
vague sympathy for Krikor. Krikor of Yoghonoluk, whom no 
one had ever quoted, or ever would quote! He had to clamber 
along the edge of a bare surface of rock, to surmount two 
crevices. Already he had in view the jutting ledge, behind 
which his descent would begin. He stopped to rest. The un- 
fathomable gulf lay open beneath him. “Shall I get to Suedia? 
It’s all the same. Lose my foothold? It’s all the same. First 
you fall hard,” it occurred to him, “then you fall soft.” How 
far behind he had left Julietta even now! ... As Gonzaguc 
thrust his way on, among shrubs and bushes, four shots rang 
out in quick succession, and spattered past him. He threw 
himself down, pulled back the catch of his revolver. His heart 
thumped. Krikor’s warning! ... It was not, after all, a mat- 
ter of such indifidrence whether or not he got to Suedia. The 
erring feet of avengers pattered by, but Gonzague jumped up, 
seized a big stone, and hurled it down, at a wide tangpnr- A 

5*3 



noisy scurry below. The pursuers thought they had tradced 
their victim, and sent several bullets pinging after him, while 
Gonzague sped away from them, almost on wings, to the point 
where the mountain slopes to the village of Habaste. 

He stopped, panting for breath. Better this way! These 
Armenian bullets had tidied out of his mind whatever sense of 
guilt still clouded it. He smiled. His eyes,^under the short, 
danting brows, moved alertly, scanning the way in front of 
him. 

At this minute Juliette still hovered uneasily between half- 
consciousness and oblivion. Hadn’t someone said: “Yes, sleep. 
Get to sleep, Juliette”? And whose voice? Well? Had they 
kept on saying it? Or just said it ... ? “Yes, sleep. Get to 
sleep, Juliette.” 

She opened her eyes. In thirty seconds, she knew that this 
was the tent . . . and Gabriel and Iskuhi. It was very hard 
to move her tongue. Her gums, her mouth, had no sensation 
in them. These people were encroaching on her solitude. Why 
wouldn’t they leave her in peace? She turned her head, heavy 
as a mountain, on one side. “What do you leave the lamp 
burning for? . . . Do put it out! . . . The oil’s smelling — so 
unpleasant.” 

Juliette’s eyes saw nothing. She had been looking for what 
wasn’t there to find. But something really terrible became 
clear to her. She seemed to have got back all her strength, to be 
well again. She flung oil the blanket. She swung both legs 
out of bed. She shrieked: “St^han! Where’s Stephan? 
Stephan’s to come to me!” 

Iskuhi and Gabriel forced Juliette, who struggled hard, 
back into bed. Gabriel stroked and pacified; he talked to her: 
“You’re ill, Juliette. Stephan mustn’t see you. It’d be dangerous 
for him. ... Be reasonable.” 

But her whole life, hearing, comprehension, were centred 
in the screams which kept coming out of her: “Stephan? 
Stephan? Where?” 


5*4 



This super-conscious terror which shrieked in the patient 
conununicated itself suddenly to Gabriel. He pulled back the 
canvas door and rushed out, into bright moonlight, to the 
sheikh-tent, where Stephan slept. It was empty. Bagradian 
struck a light. Dead lay the couch of Monsieur (^nzague. Its 
occupant had left it painfully tidy. It looked as smooth and 
undisturbed as though it had not been slept in for weeks. Not 
so Stephan’s, over which there writhed a wild, disordered 
vitah^. The sheets hung down. On the mattress stood the 
boy’s open suitcase, out of which underclothes, suits, pairs of 
sodcs, welled, in many-coloured profusion. The food-chest in 
the corner had been forced open and plundered carelessly. 
Stephan’s rucksack, acquired in Switzerland, had gone. And, 
of Gabriel’s things, the thermos flask, which only yesterday 
he remembered having placed on that litde table, was not to 
be found. Having looked again carefully, all round the tent, 
in search of clues, he went slowly out into the night again, 
stood outside, with his head bent slighdy, and thought it out. 
What did it mean? “Probably up to some new idiotic trick, 
which those damned boys have hatched out among them.” 
But everything hopeful and good in this explanation was con- 
tradicted by some sardomc, deeper knowledge. He was very 
calm, as he always was at decisive moments. In the servants* 
sleeping-quarters he found only Kristaphor, whom he roused. 
“Get up, Kristaphor, quick! We must wake Avakian. He may 
know something. Stephan’s missing.” 

These words were said without excitement. The worried 
steward wondered how his master could be so calm, after all 
that had happened. They went towards the North Saddle to 
find Avakian. For a second Gabriel turned back indecisively 
to Juliette’s tent. There, it was all quiet again. He went on so 
quickly that Kristaphor could scarcely keep beside him. 


P5 




BOOK THREE 


DISASTER, RESCUE, THE END 


‘To him that overcomcth will I give to cat of the hidden 
manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new 
name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.” 

Rbvblatiom ii, 17 




Interlude of the Gods 


1 


"Here, my dear Dr. Lepsius, you have only a very small part 
of our dossier on the Armenian question.” 

And so this affable privy councillor laid his white, nobly 
veined hand on the dusty heap which towered so high above 
the desk that his equine, aristocratic features kept disappearing 
behind the pile. The tall windows of the noticeably empty 
little room stood open wide. A lazy breath of summer found 
its way in from the Foreign Office garden. Johannes Lepsius sat 
a little stiff on the visitor’s chair, his hat on his knees. Scarcely 
.more than a month had passed since his memorable calk with 
Enver Pasha, yet the pastor looked alarmingly changed. His 
hair seemed sparser, his beard looked greyer than it had, his 
nose seemed to have shrunk and become more pointed. His 
eyes no longer beamed. The dreamy distances had gone out of 
him, replaced by an expectant, mocking suspiciousness. Could 
the sickness in his blood have made ominous progress in these 
few weeks? Or was it the curse on all Armenians which, in 
secret affinity, was devouring him, the German? Was it the 
unheard-of amount of work he had managed to do in so short 
a time? A new campaign against death and the devil was fully 
organized. There was even money to hand; the most influential 
people had been won over. And now all that remained was to 
force an answer from the sphinx-like countenance of the State. 
The pastor’s eyes, from b^ind their twinkling glasses, scorn- 
fully viewed these piles of documents. The affable privy coun- 

529 



dllor raised his eydnows, oot from surpa'ise, but td ke iJl 
gold-rimmed mon^e 

“Believe me, not a day passes without some instructions 
going out from here to the Embassy in Constantinople. Aiul 
there isn’t an hour at which our ambassador isn’t doing his 
best to influence Talaat and Enver in the dreadful Armenian 
business. In spite of the most pressing cares of state, the 
Chancellor himsdf is most emphatically behind us, in all this. 
You know him— a man like Marcus Aurelius. Oh, and by the 
by. Dr. Lepsius, Herr Bethmann-Hollweg asks me to apolo- 
gize. It was unluckily quite impossible for him to see you 
today.’’ 

Lepsius leaned far back. Even his sonorous voice had become 
uneasier and sharper. “And what successes have our diplomats 
to report, Herr Geheimrat?” 

The white marmoreal hand fished at documents. “Look 
here, all this is from Scheubner-Richter in Erzerum. All these 
are from Hoffmann in Alcxandretta, and Rosslfi:, the chief 
consul in Aleppo. Why, they do nothing else but send reports! 
They’re working themselves to the bone for the Armenians. 
Heaven knows how many of these poor people Rossler alone 
hasn’t managed to save. And what thanks does he get for all 
their humanity? The English press describes him as a blood- 
hound who stirred up the Turks to massacre in Marash. 
What’s one to do?” 

Lepsius was now doing his best to meet and fix the affable 
eyes which came and went behind paper clouds, like a some- 
what capricious moon. “I know what I’d do, Herr Geheimrati 
Rossler and the others are very fine men, I know them — 
Rossler especially is a very fine fellow indeed. But what can a 
poor, unimportant consul manage, if he isn’t propo’ly 
supported?” 

“Really, Herr Pastor, I don’t understand. Not properly sup- 
ported? That’s more than unjust.” 

A shght nervous gesture from Dr. Lepsius implied that this 

530 



fur too seneus, «nd dme too dort, to beat about 
^ official bush. “I kuow perfectly wdl, Herr Geheimrat, that 
all kinds of things are being attempted. I know all about the 
daily interventions and demarches of our ambassador. But we 
aren’t dealing with statesmen who’vc grown up in the diplo- 
matic game, we're dealing with people like Enver and Talaat. 
Every conceivable demarche is far too mild for people of that 
kind, and not even the unheard-of would be enough. The 
extermination of Armenians is the keystone of their whole 
national policy. I’ve convinced myself of that in a long talk 
with Enver Pasha himself. A whole barrage of German 
d&narches would at best only be a nuisance to them — sl strain 
on their hypocritical politeness.” 

The privy councillor folded his arms. His long face took 
on an expectant look. “And do you. Dr. Lepius, know an- 
other method of intervening in the domestic policy of a 
friendly, an allied power?” 

Johannes Lepsius looked as intently into his hat as though 
he had stored a sheet of notes in it. But, God I no notes woidd 
have been necessary. Ten thousand notes, day and night, kept 
singing in that poor tired mind, so that now he could scarcely 
eva sleep. He made an effort to collect himself, to broach the 
thing shortly and methodically. 

“We ought above all to be perfectly clear as to what is hap- 
pening, has already happened, in Turkey. An anti-Christian 
persecution of such dimensions that former persecutions under 
Nero or Diocletian bear no comparison. And more — the worst 
crime in recorded history so far— that in itself means some- 
thing, I thmk you’ll admit . . .” 

Vague curiosity lit up the pale eyes of the privy councillor. 
He was silent as, with careful words, Lepsius felt his way, 
further and further. No doubt, since his defeat by Enver 
Pasha, he knew a litde more than he had, about how to deal 
vnth politicians. 

“We mustn’t see the Armenians as some kind of half-savage^ 

531 



eastern tribe. . . . ThcyVe educated, cultivated people, wdth a 
nervous sensibility which, frankly, I say one doesn’t often find 
in Europe.” 

No twitch in the narrow, equine face gave any reason to 
suppose that perhaps, m its view, this classification of the 
Armenian “mercantile race” was slightly exaggerated. 

And Dr. Lepsius continued. “This isn’t by any means a 
mere matter of domestic policy, for the Turks to settle as they 
think fit. Not even the complete extermination of a tribe of 
pygmies can be considered as entirely a matter between ex- 
terminators and victims. All the less can we Germans afford 
to take refuge in deploring, or despairing, neutrality. Our 
enemies abroad hold us responsible.” 

The privy councillor pushed away the documents with a 
shove, as though he needed air. “It’s part of the deepest tragedy 
of Germany’s position as a combatant that we, no matter how 
clear our consciences may be, should be loaded with the blood- 
guilt of other races.” 

“Everything in this world is primarily a matter of morals, 
and only very much later one of politics.” 

The privy councillor nodded approbation. “Excellent, Herr 
Pastor! I quite agree. In every political decision one ought 
first to calculate the moral effect.” 

Lepsius sensed a victory. He must make the most of his 
advantage. “I’m not here as a mere powerless individual, Herr 
Geheimrat. I don’t think it’s too much to say that I’m here in 
the name of the whole of German Christendom, both 
Protestant and Catholic. I’m acting and speaking on behalf* 
of such influential men as Harnack, l^issmann, Dibel- 
ius . . .” 

The privy councillor glanced appreciatively, his eyes gave 
due weight to each of the names. But Johannes Lepsius was 
now in his old, and dangerous, full spate: “The German 
Christian refuses to look on any longer with folded arms 
at a crime against the whole of Chrisuanity. Our rnny-i>pc r« 

532 



will no longer permit us to be its lukewarm accomplices. The 
empire’s hope of victory is dependent on the satisfaction of 
German Christians. I personally am sick with shame that the 
enemy press should be printing columns on these Armenian 
deportations, whereas the German people gets fobbed off with 
Enver’s lying communiques and otherwise isn’t told a word. 
Haven’t we earned our right to know the truth about the fate 
of our co-religionists? This shameful state of affairs must be 
ended.” 

The privy councillor, rather astonished at the hortatory 
voice, set finger-tips together, remarking innocently: “But the 
censorship? The censors would never allow a thing like that! 
You really have no idea how involved such matters are, Hen 
Lepsius.” 

“Not to be tricked is the simplest right of the German 
people.” 

The privy councillor smiled indulgently. “What would be 
the results of such a press-campaign^ A heavy strain both on 
German nerves and the Turkish alliance.” 

“That alliance must not be allowed to make us accomplices 
in the eyes of history. So we want our government to act as 
quickly as possible. Why don’t you demand, with the utter- 
most msistence, in Istanbul, that a neutral commission of in- 
quiry of Americans, Swiss, Dutch, and Scandinavians be 
admitted to Anatolia and Syria?” 

“You know the Young Turkish potentates well enough 
yourself, Herr Lepsius, to be able to judge the sort of answer 
we should be likely to get to such a demand.” 

“Then Germany must use the most drastic methods.” 

“And those would be, in your opinion . . . ?” 

“The threat to withdraw all support from Turkey, recall 
the German military mission, and retire German officers and 
troops from the fronts.” 

The repose, the winning affability, on the privy councillor’s 
steady features, melted into genuine kindliness. “You know, 

533 



Herr Lepnus, yooVe been described to me just as you ater* 
80 . . . innocent" 

Slimj he arose. His grey summer suit sat less sti£ 9 y on Um 
than they -do usually on his kmd. His slight negligence c£ 
manner inspired instant sympathy and trust. He tum^ to the 
big map, Europe and Asia Mmor, hung on the wall. His blue- 
veined hand approximately covered the Near East 

“The Dardanelles, the Caucasus, Palestine, and Mesopo> 
tamia are German fronts today, Herr Lepsius, more even than 
Turkish. If they collapse, the whole war structure collapses 
with them. We really can’t threaten Turkey with our own 
suicide unless we want to make ourselves ridiculous. I don’t 
think I even need remind you of the tremendous significance 
which His Majesty the Kaiser attaches to our power in the 
East. But aren’t you even aware that the Turks by no means 
feel indebted to us — on the contrary, they consider themselves 
our creditors. I don’t see why you shouldn’t be told that a 
very powerful group on the Committee would be perfectly 
ready at any minute to change horses, and negotiate with the 
Allies. You might easily hve to see France and En glan d, who 
today raise such a howl over Armenian atroaties, shut both 
eyes to the same atrocities tomorrow. You speak of truth, Herr 
l^sius. The truth is that the Turks hold trumps in this par- 
ticular game, that we have to mind our p’s and q’s and keep 
well within the limits of the possible.” 

Johannes Lepsius listened quietly. He had heard them all, 
again and again, these “truths” which the children of this, 
world utter with their sharp logic. They led to incontestable 
conclusions. Whoso admitt^ a single link in the chain was 
for ever lost. But the pastor was far beyond the point of ad- 
mitting anything. In these few weeks his mind had grown a 
shell, which rendered it impervious to such processes. He 
would not let himself be drawn out of it. Stubbornly he re- 
mained on his own ground. 


534 



DOt a politidaa. It’s not injr business to find posable 
ways by which, even now, a part of the Armenian nation can 
be sav^. But it is my duty as the representative of a great 
number of German Christians! who think as I do, to voice 
the urgent petition that such ways and means may be dis- 
covered, and discovered before it’s too late.” 

“No matter how we may turn the thing and twist it, Herr 
Lepsius, it may be possible here and there to ameliorate the 
lot of these Armenians, but unluckily we shan’t be able to 
change it.” 

“Neither my friends nor I can accept that unchristian stand- 
point.” 

"Please realize that, in this Armenian destiny, certain his- 
toricd forces, too vast for us to control, may be working them- 
seTves out.” 

“I only realize that Enver and Talaat have taken advantage, 
with devilish cunning, of the best possible moment at which 
to cast themselves for the role of historical forces.” 

The privy councilor smiled rather mincmgly, as diough it 
were his turn now, to display a sample of his religious views. 
“Doesn’t Nietzsche say: ‘What totters, ought it not to be 
thrust down?”’ 

But Nietzsche was not the man to disconcert such a child 
of God as Johannes Lepsius. Rather annoyed at the generalities 
in vvhich the conversation kept petering out, he answered 
shortly: “Which of us knows whether he’s falling, or pushing 
down?” 

The privy councillor, back at his desk again, took another 
brief glance at the map on the wall. “The Armenians are going 
under because of their geographical position. It’s the fate of 
the weak, of the hated minority.” 

“Every man and every nation at one time or another be- 
comes ‘the weak.’ That’s why nobody should tolerate persecu- 
tion, let alone extermination, as a precedent” 

535 



“Have you never, Herr Lepsius, asked yourself whether 
national minorities may not cause unnecessary trouble^ 
whether it mayn’t be better that they should vanish?” 

Lepsius took oS his glasses and polished them hard. His 
eyes peered and blinked wearily. Their myopic look seemed to 
give his whole body something courageous. 

“Herr Gehcimrat, are not we Germans in a minority?” 

“What do you mean by that? I don’t understand you.” 

"In the midst of a Europe united against us, we’re a dam> 
nably imperilled minority. It only needs one bad break' 
through. And we’ve not chosen our geography so brilliandy 
either.” 

The privy councillor’s face had ceased to be kindly, it looked 
sharp and pale. A whifE of dusty midday heat beat in through 
the window. 

“Quite right, Herr Pastor. And therefore it’s the duty of 
every German to be concerned for the fate of his own people, 
and to think of the rivers of blood which, what you prefer to 
call the German minority, is shedding. That is the only sund- 
point from which a German can view the Armenian question.” 

"We Christians depend on the grace of God and our obedi- 
ence to the Gospels. I tell you quite frankly, Herr Geheimrat, 
that I reject any other standpoint. For weeks now I’ve been 
seeing more clearly every day that power will have to be taken 
out of the hands of the children of this world, the pohticians, 
if ever communion in the Lord, the Corpus Christi, is to be- 
come a reality in our poor little world.” , 

"Render unto Caesar ” 

"But what is Caesar’s — apart from a worn-out penny piece? 
Christ was too wise to tell us that. No I No! the peoples are 
the slaves of their racial differences. And their flatterers, who 
want to live off them, intensify such things and stimulate their 
vanity. As though there were any special merit in being born 
a dog or a cat, a turnip or a potato. Jesus Christ, Who gives us 
the eternal example of the divine man, only put on human 

536 



form in order to conquer it So that on earth only the true 
sons of God diould rule, from, die very faa that they have 
conquered their race, their earthly conditioning. That is my 
political creed, Herr Gcheimrat.** 

The Prussian aristocrat’s face showed not the slightest sug- 
gestion of irony. “You talk like a wnfirmed Catholic, Herr 
Pastor.” 

“More Catholic than any Catholic— since the Church of my 
trust does not share her power with any lay authority.” 

The privy councillor screwed in his monocle again; this con- 
veyed the suggestion that the time for debate had come to an 
end. “But till we can re-establish, the Holy Inquisition, we poor 
children of this world have got to take the responsibility.” 

Johannes Lepsius, who perhaps had gone a little too far, 
drew back into his shell. His voice sounded calm, almost off- 
hand: “Let me still be quite frank with you, Herr Geheimrat. 
Till a few days ago I was hopeful, and I still beheved that 
Herr Bethmann-Hollweg would support me in this fight with 
more drastic measures than he has, so far. You have let me see 
quite finally that our government’s hands are tied in its deal- 
ings with Turkey, and that we must confine ourselves to the 
usual interviews and demarches. But no reasons of state tie 
mine. And now the Armeman question in Germany rests 
solely on me. I’m not inclined to make concessions and give 
in. I, in conjunction with my friends, mtend to enlighten our 
own people. Since only when men know the truth will it be 
possible to estabhsh our work of Christian assistance on a 
broad basis. I therefore request that my hands may not be-tied 
in these activities.” 

The privy councillor had been deep in the study of his wrist- 
watch; he glanced up from it, pleased. “One frankness is worth 
another, Herr Pastor. You mustn’t therefore misunderstand 
me if I tell you that for some time now, we’ve been keeping 
an eye on you. Your stay in Constantinople was the subject of 
a great many complaints. I repeat, you have no idea how com- 

537 



plex the situation is. I’m sdrty. I have the greatest respect Joot 
your humane activities. And yet, in the political sense, such 
activities are— well, not desirable. I would advise you, my dear 
Herr Lepsius, to keep them within very dcBnite bounds, and 
make them as unobtrusive as possible.” 

The pastor’s reply came more like a growl than a solemnity: 
"A call has come to me. No power on earth can prevent my 
following that voice.” 

“Oh, you mustn’t say that, Herr Doctor Lepsius.” The 
startled privy councillor’s face looked almost flurried in its 
kindliness. “A few powers of this world are already doing their 
very best to prevent you effectively.” 

The pastor patted the whole left side of his coat before he 
stood up. “I’m extremely grateful, Herr Geheimrat, for all 
your frankness and your advice.” 

The tall, slim councillor faced Herr Lepsius, in a kind of 
self-satisfied embarrassment which sat him perfectly. “I’m so 
glad we’ve managed to come to such a qui^ understanding,’ 
Herr Pastor. You’re looking as though you needed a rest. 
Wouldn’t it be better for you to slack off a bit— just go on 
living from day to day. Don’t you live in Potsdam?” 

Johannes Lepsius regretted having taken up so much official 
time. But the privy councillor showed him out with a posi- 
tively ingratiating smile. 

“My dear Herr Pastor I It’s a long time since I’ve spent such 
an interesting hour.” 

Down in the stuffiy, midday Wilhelmstrasse, Johannes Lep- 
sius stood and asked himself whether, as his Lord instructed 
him, he had been as meek as a dove, as wise as a serpent He 
was instantly forced to the admission that both dove and ser- 
pent had failed to come oS. But luckily he had been sufficiently 
prudent to obtain, some time ago, all the necessary passports, 
identification descriptions, travelling permits, and permissions 
to export currency. That was why, a few minutes ago, he had 
tapped the left side of his coat so carefully, to assure himself 

538 



sf these sacred objects. He turned sharply round. Suppose 
even now a detective were tracking him! His mind was made 
up. The express for Basel left at 3:40. He had still more than 
three hours in which to telephone Potsdam for his luggage 
and make all his other arrangements for setting out. Even 
tomorrow the frontiers might be closed to him. But he must 
get back to Istanbul I That was his place, even though he had 
still no clear idea what to do there. In Germany, in any case, 
his work would go forward without him. The organization 
had been built up, the office opened, patrons, friends, col- 
laborators, won over. His place was not in far-off safety, but 
on the very coasts of the sea of blood. 

The scurry and din of the Potsdamer Platz deafened him. 
The short-sighted Lepsius waited a long time for his chance 
to get across it safely. The thunder, rattle, clatter, and grating 
of cars, motor-buses, trams, surged round his ears, hke a 
single tone. Like the bells of some great barbaric cathedral. 
A little rhyme came up in his mind; he had taken it down 
many years ago, on the deck of a httle dancing steamer, as it 
bore him across to the rocky island of Patmos-Patino, the holy 
apocalyptic isle of St. John. Its refrain sang in him: 

A and O 
A and O 

Ring the bells of Patino. 

And that httle rhyme seemed to link two such different , 
places as Patmos and Potsdamer Platz. 

The life of a shy night animal in Istanbul. 

Johannes Lepsius knew himself spied upon and tracked. 
Usually, therefore, he left the Hotel Tokatlyan only at n^ht. 
On the day after his arrival he had paid his duty-call at the 
German Embassy. Instead of the Minister, Embassy secretary, 
or press attache, a very minor official indeed had received him, 
with the plain, unvarnished inquiry what object brought him 

539 



back to Constantinople. Lepsius answered that he was there 
without a definite object, merely to rest in this city of which 
he <Vas extremely fond. That he had no definite object was true 
enough. The pastor had still no clear idea oj. what he could 
manage to undertake. He was out of favour with the Turks, 
and now even with the Germans. That splendid naval com- 
mander attached to the Embassy, for instance, who had been 
so helpful in getting him the interview with Enver, met him 
now with the cut direct in the Grande Rue dc Pera. God alone 
could say what dirty lies weren’t being told about him every- 
where. Often a cold shudder ran down his spine at the thought 
that he was alone in the Turkish capital, that his country’s 
Embassy had not only ceased to afford support, but was al- 
most hosule. Should Ittihad be inspired with the notion of 
getting him neatly out of the way, not much diplomatic fuss 
would be likely to be made over his corpse. At faint-hearted 
moments he thought of going back to Germany. He was only 
wasting his time. This was already the third week in August. 
Suffocaung heat struck up from the Bosporus. “What am I 
after here?” he kept asking himself. And so compared himself 
to an unskilled burglar, trying to pick the lock of an iron door 
with his bare hand, without even a jemmy, or skeleton key, 
and obliged moreover to work under the eyes of the pohee. 
But so much was clear. The lock of that door into the interior 
would have to be picked, for there ever to be a chance of 
real help. Funds sent by official channeb melted away, with 
nothing to show for them. 

Johannes Lepsius was so daring as to visit the Armenian 
patriarch, Monsignor Saven. Since they last met, what little 
there was left of life in it seemed to have ebbed out of that 
priest’s dead face. This holy man abstractedly eyed his visitor. 
When he recognized him, he could not hold back the tears. 

“It’ll do you no good, my son,” he whispered, “if they know 
you’ve been coming here to see me.” 

Now Dr. Lepsius heard the full horror of the truth, as it 

540 



had developed in the weeks he had been away. The patriarch 
told it curtly, dryly, as though not in words. Any further k- 
tempt to help was worse than useless, it was superfluous, since 
the deportation law had already taken full effect. Most of the 
clergy, all the political leaders, had been slaughtered. This peo- 
pie now was composed of famished women and children. Any 
neutral or German help given to these Armenian women pi o- 
voked Enver and Talaat to further savagery. 

“The best thing is not to try to do anything, but to keep still, 
and die.” 

Had Lepsius not noticed how this house, the patriarchate, 
was surrounded with police spies? Every word they were say- 
ing would be reported next morning to Talaat Bey. And so^ 
with terror in his eyes. Monsignor Saven asked his visitor to 
put his head close against his lips. In this way did Lepsius 
get news of the Armenian revolt on Musa Dagh, the defeat 
of Turkish regulars, that the mountain had so far proved im- 
pregnable. The patriarch’s whisper became unsteady: “Isn’t it 
terrible? They say the army has lost over a hundred men.” 

Johannes Lepsius did not consider it terrible by any means. 
His blue eyes shone like a boy’s behind sharp-rimmed glasses. 
“Terrible? Magnificent I If there’d been three Musa Daghs, 
we should have heard a very different story. Oh, Monsignor, 
I only wish I were up on the Musa Dagh.” 

The pastor had said it far too loud. The patriarch’s hand 
lay, stiff with fear, upon his mouth. As he took leave, Lepsius 
handed over some of the funds collected in Germany. The 
priest crammed the banknotes, as swiftly as though they were 
red-hot coals, into the patent safe in his office. Not much hope 
of their ever reaching their destmation, Deir ez-Zor. The mon- 
signor was whispering again, sharply, in the German’s ear, 
something which at first was unintelligible. 

“It isn’t we of the patriarchate, nor you, nor any other Ger- 
man, nor any neutral, who can help us. We should have to 
find Turks as intermediaries, you understand. TurksI” 

54 * 



'' ^Tnrks?” Dr. Lq)sius murmured, recapturing a giunpK tS. 
Enver Pasha’s face. “What a mad idea.” 

What a mad idea, and yet already, independently of Dr. 
Lepsius, it was on its way to bemg r^zed. The pastor, in his 
hotel dining-room, had made the acquaintance of a Turk, a 
doctor of about forty. Professor Nezimi Bey was very well 
dressed and westernized. He hved in the Tokatlyan, but had 
his consulting-room in one of the best streets in P^a. At first 
Lepsius mistook him for one of the least uncongenial incarna- 
tions of the spirit which infused the Young Turkish world. 
But, in spite of his European science, of clothes admirably cut, 
appearances proved to be dccepuvc. They often got into con- 
versation. Three or four times they arranged to have their 
meal at the same table. Lepsius was extremely cautious. He 
was forced to be so. The Turkish doctor was anything but 
cautious or reserved. The German started, and held his tongue 
as the doctor began to vent his hatred of the pohcy of the peo- 
ple in control, his utter detestation of Enver and Talaat. Had 
they sent an agent provocateur? But, as he eyed Nezimi’s 
pleasant features, considered his position, his way of express- 
ing himself, his really surprising powers as a Imguist, such 
suspicion seemed to be too absurd. Impossible that Enver 
should dispose of agents of this calibre. Yet Lepsius was still 
wary enough not to let himself be led into talking freely. He 
did not deny that he was doing his best, as a Christian priest, 
to mitigate the lot of his co-religionists. But he would not 
criticize, and confined himself to the role of attentive listenei*. 

Though Nezimi seemed not explicidy pro-Ar menian he 
raged against the Committee’s deportation policy. “Those fields 
of Armenian corpses will mean the end of Turkey.” 

Lespius still looked stolid. “The vast majority of the nadon 
is behind Enver and Talaat.” 

“What?” Nezimi glared up at him. "The vast majority of 
the nation! You foreigners haven’t any idea how insignifirawr 

54a 



dutt; really is. ^bove all, how XBorally insignificant 1 Why, 
composed o£ the shablnest parvenu scum. When people ^ 
diat sort insist on their Osmanian race, it’s the worst insolence! 
These pure-hred Osmans mostly come out of the Macedonian 
stew-pot in which the racial ragout of the whole Balkans 
floats.” 

“That’.« an old story, Professor. Usually the people who 
dwell on their race are the ones who have most need of some- 
thing of that kind.” 

Nezimi gazed sadly at Lepsius. “It’s a pity that a man of 
your kind, who has made so close a study of our conditions, 
should still have no idea of the real Turkey. Do you know that 
all true Turks detest these Armenian convoys, even worse 
than you do?” 

Lepsius pricked up his ears. “And who are these true Turks, 
if you don’t mind my asking. Professor?” 

“All those who haven’t lost their religion.” 

But Nezimi would say no more than that. That same eve- 
ning he knocked at the pastor’s door. He gave an impression 
of strange excitement. 

“If you like, tomorrow I’ll take you into the tekkeh of the 
Sheikh Achmed. It’s the greatest honour I could pay you. And 
there, besides, you’ll be able to speak your mind about the 
Armenians, and perhaps find out some way of helping them.” 
And he repeated: “I shall be doing you the greatest honour.” 

So that, immediately after luncheon next day, Nezimi es- 
corted Dr. Lepsius, as they had arranged. Most of the way was 
done on foot. That day a cool breeze off the Sea of Marmora 
tempered the sweltering noidday sun. Flocks of herons and 
storks sped across the vivid afternoon sky of Istanbul, to thar 
nests on the opposite side. The doctor conducted Dr. Lepsius 
along past Enver Pasha’s Seraskeriat and the mosque of the 
Sultan Bayazid into the endless streets of Ak Serai. They 
walked interminably westwards. They had penetrated the 
ruined confusion of the innermost town. Pavements had ceased 

543 



to be. Herds o£ sheep and goats flocked round them. The an- 
cient Byzantine city wall, above a chaos of wooden houses, 
frowned on them with its crenellated turrets. But the pa^r 
was by no means in the mood to rejoice his aesthetic sense at 
the spectacle of a highly picturesque, even if intensely squalid, 
neighbourhood. Nor did that innermost heart of Islamic piety, 
which today was to open itself for his benefit, interest him as 
a new experience. Like all minds in the throes of some obsess- 
ing, tormenting struggle for an end, he saw it all solely in its 
relationship to Armenian woes. So that, anything but receptive 
to new experiences, he was already turning over suggestions 
and projects. It was these and not curiosity which inspired him 
to question his guide. “I suppose we’re on our way to the 
Mevlevi dervishes.” 

Lepsius, in spite of long sojourns in Palestine and Asia 
Minor, knew next to nothing about Islam. To him it was 
merely the fanatical enemy of Christendom. 

But since it is one of our saddest human weaknesses that 
we always know least of the very person whose mind we 
should penetrate to the core — of the enemy — the pastor had 
the vaguest notions of the world of true Moslem belief. He had 
only said “Mevlevi dervishes” because their very well-known 
name was familiar to him. 

Dr. Nezimi waved off the suggestion: "No! No! Sheikh 
Achmed, our master, is the head of an order, called by our 
people ‘the thieves of hearts.’ ” 

“What a strange title for an order. Why ‘the thieves of 
hearts’?” • 

“You’ll see that for yourself.” 

Still, even on their way, the guide condescended to explana- 
tions. He informed the German that the flood of Moham- 
medan religion divides itself into two mam powerful streams, 
the Shaariat and the Tarikaat. Let the Shaariat stand approxi- 
mately for the concept of the Catholic secular priesthood, the 
idea of the Tarikaat would be falsified by comparisons with 

544 



western monasticisni. To be a dervish does not mean to re- 
nounce the world and withdraw for one’s whole life into a 
tekkeh. Anyone might become a dervish, provided he ful- 
filled certain conditions, and he need not therefore renounce 
his profession or family. The grand vizir was equally eligible 
with the tailor, coppersmith, bank<lcrk, or officer. So that thus 
the most diverse brotherhood was scattered up and down the 
whole country, and brothers knew one another everywhere, 
“by instinct,” without further recognition. 

Johannes Lcpsius asked, reflectively purposeful: “So that 
numerically these dervish orders constitute a considerable 
power?” 

“Not only numerically, Herr Doctor, believe me.” 

“And in what docs their religious life consist?” 

“You, I believe, would call it ‘spiritual exerases.' But prob< 
ably that’s another misleading expression. We meet from time 
to time. We exercise our spiritual faculty. We pray. It’s called 
‘zikr.’ And everyone, once or twice in his life, has to serve the 
tekkeh, and live there some time. But the chief thing is, we 
obey our teacher and superior, out of the fullness of our hearts, 
from love.” 

“Your teacher and superior is the Sheikh Achmed, Profes- 
sor?” 

Though Lepsius had not directly asked who Sheikh Ach- 
med exactly was, Nezimi supplied the answer: 

"He is a well. You would say ‘holy man’ — and that again 
would be a complete mistranslation. His life, which is a higher 
life than other men’s, has enabled him to develop powers in 
himself. You know the French expression — initiation. And as 
you’ll see, the most splendid thing about him is that he’s just 
an ordinary man.” 

They stopped at a high wall. Fig trees, and the tops of 
cypresses, goldcnrain and wistaria, betrayed a garden. Nezimi 
Bey tapped with his stick on the worm-eaten door, let into the 
wall. They were kept a long time waiting. Then an old man, 

545 



built, with mild, kind eyes, csudc and opcDfiif 
The dark miracle of the g[arden disclosed itself. A cedar, many 
centuries old, stood predominant. The twa rusty halves of a 
heavy chain dangled from the strong branches of the tree. 
Long ago, Nezimi told the pastor, the cedar had been chained 
in its youth, till its sap, rismg in strength, forced the chain 
asunder. A symbol of the dervish’s life. In this place, strangely 
cut off from the din of streets, splashed a fountain. That too 
seemed fully emblematic of the Turkish reverence for water. 
A strange dark house bounded the garden to the right, to the 
left a bright one, in good repair. They entered the bright, 
wood house, having left their shoes. Nezimi led the German 
up dark close stairs to a kind of loggia, built over the big apart- 
ment of the tekkeh, which, with its slim wood pilasters and 
walls cut in filigree at the top, had the look of a vast pavilion. 
In its east wall, turned to Mecca, there was a throne-niche, 
built in, with a raised mat. A few men squatted on either side 
of this raised divan. The doctor described them as “caliphs,” as 
deputies or trusted followers of the sheikh, the men nearest his 
heart. They all wore the white turban, even the infantry cap- 
tain, who oddly was one of them. Lepsius also noticed a little, 
spare old man, who must be suffering from a nervous com- 
plaint, since his thin, goat-bearded face kept twitching. One re- 
markably handsome man with a soft brown beard, wearing a 
long, shirt-hke cowl, Nezimi called “the son of the sheikh.” 
Beside this youthful-looking man, whose robe seemed to glint 
with a sheen of silver, there squatted a fifteen-year-old boy, 
the son of the son, as whitely clad as his father. But Lepsius’s 
eyes were especially turned on one of these men, something 
in whose bearing and attitude showed him to be the master 
of them all, the strongest personality in the room. 

Thus did the pastor picture to himself the great caliphs, 
Bayazid, Mahmud the SecoUd, perhaps the Prophet bitniielf, 
A face tense with fanaticism, a blue-black beard forcing its 
way up the face almost to the sockets of the eyes. The staring 

546 



locdc which rested on nothing, had no mercy, in it, either &Mr 
enemy or for firiend even, “lliat is the Tiirbedar of Brussa,” 
Lepsius heard, and he learned further that this title described 
a very exalted symbolic office, the guardian of the tombs of 
sultans and holy men. The ^n was also a great scholar, not 
only in the learning of the Koran but in several modern sci> 
ences also. The little old gendeman, sittmg there facing him 
so quiedy— yes, that one there, with the white hands, twisting 
amber b^ds — also fulfilled a high symbolic function, “Super- 
visor of the genealogical table of the Prophet.” 

“Do these men always live in the tekkeh?” 

“No, it’s a great and very fortunate coincidence that you 
should be visiting the sheikh today. The old gentleman over 
there, the supervisor, comes from a long way off, from Syria, 
Antioch, I think. He’s the Sheikh’s oldest friend, you know. 
His name is Agha Rifaat Bereket.” 

“Agha Rifaat Bereket.” Lepsius repeated it absent-mindedly, 
as though the name were not entirely unknown to him. But he 
had no eyes, either for the Agha, or for the thirty-five other 
people whose murmuring voices filled the apartment, but only 
for the proud Turbedar. Therefore he did not notice the arrival 
of the Sheikh Achmed until the instant when he took his place 
on the divan. Nezimi Bey had been right. Outwardly the 
head of this ghosdy order, which must control the lives of a 
hundred thousand faithful, showed little of his dignity and 
powers. He was a corpulent greybeard, whose features ex- 
pressed staid good-natur^ and did not fail to suggest a 
practical shrewdness m their estimate of the things of this 
world. 

They had all sprung up, and were crowding eagerly, avidly 
round the old sheikh, to kiss his hand. Not until all the others 
had stilled their love and reverence to the uttermost, by means 
of this gesture, did the Tiirbedar bend down over the soft, fat 
right hand of Achmed. 

The zikr ecstasy he now witnessed left Dr. Lepsius not only 

547 



cdid, but full of a dark, surging uneasiness. The cerenoony 
began as follows: the Sheikh’s handsome son stood in a line 
of young men, all clad in the same long, white cowl, against 
the west wall of the apartment The htde boy, his small face 
preternaturally solemn, ended the right wing of this line. 
There arose from nowhere the nasal, monotonous note of a 
shawm'pipe. A man, standing with his eyes shut in front of a 
gold-carv^ Koran lectern, mtoned a sura, in humming, dis- 
turbing falsetto. The old sheikh waved his hand m a scarcely 
perceptible little gesture. The shawm and htany stopped to- 
gether. The son flung back his head, hstening, as if he were 
trying to catch the lightest drizzle of rain upon his face. Out 
of his throat came strangled sounds; the happiness seemed too 
great, of being permitted to speak the syllables of that verse 
which concentrates in itself the whole strength of the revealed 
Book: “La— ilah— ila— llah.” “There is no God but God.” 
Now all the others threw their heads back, and the six syl- 
lables of their creed fused into a crooning, murmurous hum. 
This, like the opening notes of a composition, defined the 
theme that now was developed. Now the son’s body was sway- 
ing in a light, angular rhythm. As the “La — ilah — ^ila — ^’llah” 
defined its cadence, he swayed from the waist towards the 
four corners of the hemisphere, forwards, back, to right, to 
left. The fourfold beat passed into the others. But there was 
none of the symmetry of driU or ballet in the surge. Each 
obeyed his own law. Each individual in this brotherhood 
seemed to be alone with himself, in ecstatic invocation of his 
God. And this gave birth to a new rhythm, a far more mani- 
fold, higher symmetry than drilled, imposed unity can effect; 
the symmetry of storm-swept woods, of lashing waves. There 
must be full freedom and solitude of the ego before his God, 
to make possible a higher community. The old sheikh, his 
caliphs, and the others took part* in these zikr exercises with 
slight accompanying movements. The boy of the young sheikh 
bent his little body about, on all sides, with desperate serious- 

548 



ness. Sometimes his poignant baby-voice could be heard shrill- 
ing out of the generri surge of the “La — ^ilah.” After about ten 
minutes the dervishes were bendmg at right angles, their cries 
had risen into hoarse, unmodulated bellowings. Another slight 
sign from the old sheikh. The ceremony stopped, suddenly. 
But now, superabundant joy, a most intimate, happy satisfac- 
tion, seemed to have stolen into the hearts of both participants 
and onlookers. Exhausted smiles lit up these faces. The men 
embraced. Johannes Lepsius had to think of the early Chris- 
tian agape. But . . . ? The love-cclebcation here below him 
did not come out of the mind, the spirit, but out of these wild 
contortions of the body. He could not understand. Meanwhile 
two more men had come into the room, through a litde side- 
door. They earned water-pitchers, dishes with food, even gar- 
ments, before Sheikh Achmed, who kept breathing over them. 
Now they had received heaUng-power. After a pause the zikr 
began again, on a level of sull greater intensity. The holy 
number, four, was in the ascendant. Therefore there ensued 
four ecstasies, each broken into by a pause. The power and 
tempo of the last was of such almost unbearable wildness that 
sometimes Lepsius shut his eyes with a feeling of seasickness. 
As the last zikr rose to near its height, the little, thin, dried-up 
old man with the twitching face suddenly leapt from the dais 
down into the room, and began spinning, like a whirligig, to 
collapse in epilepuc writhings. The pastor turned to the doctor, 
sitting behind him. Surely Nczimi would hurry down to the 
help of the epileptic. But this well-dressed man, this man who 
had studied at the Sorbonne, seemed himself no longer to 
know where he was. He twirled the upper half of his body. 
His eyes were sightless. And between his lips, from under the 
little clipped moustache, he too now babbled the long with- 
held “La — ^ilah— ila — ’llah.” The pastor had never felt so un- 
comfortable. But his feeling was not only one of dislike for 
the sight which seemed so foreign and barbarous— it was one 
of uneasy embarrassment at the fact that he, with hi$ western 

549 



aoul, shodd not fed sufficiently developed to enter mto die 
God'intoxication of the twirlers in the room bebw. 

This deep uneasiness still possessed him as he came mto the 
innermost recesses of this so madly foreign v/orld— into the 
audience-<hamber of the sheikh. He had not perhaps been 
more uneasy on the day when he had been faced with Enver 
Pasha. Yet Shakh Achmed received him cordially. He ad- 
vanced a few steps to meet Lepsius and Nezimi Bey. In the 
big room there were also, of the sheikh’s caliphs, the Turbedar 
from Brussa, the Agha Rifaat fiercket, the young sheikh, and 
the infantry captain. There was nothing here on which to sit 
save low divans against the wall. Sheikh Achmed indicated 
that Lepsius should take the seat close beside his. Lepsius had 
to squat on his crossed legs, like all the others. The old sheikh’s 
eyes, which, besides their shrewd, keen knowledge of the 
world, had in them an inexplicable quiet, as of windless places, 
turned to the guest. 

“We know who you are, and what brings you to us. I have 
no doubt you will understand us, as we hope to understand 
you. Perhaps our brother Neziim has told you that, here, we 
depend less on words than on the contact of heart to heart. 
Well, then, let us try how it is, with our two hearts.” 

The German’s coat was buttoned up. Sheikh Achmed, with 
his own white hand, unbuttoned it. He smiled a kind of 
apology. “You see, we want to get nearer each other.” 

Dr. Lepsius spoke and could understand Turkish very well; 
his Arabic was also good. But Sheikh Achmed used a difficult' 
mixture of these two languages, so that, when he became too 
idiomatic, he used Nezimi as his interpreter. The doctor trans- 
lated: 

“There arc two hearts. There is the heart of flesh, and the 
secret, heavenly heart, which surrounds the other, just as its 
scent surrounds a rose. This second heart unites us with God 
and other men. Open it, please.” 



The heavy body of the dd ihao, of possibly eighty years, 
bent forward attentively towards the pa^r. A little gesture in- 
dicated that he was to shut his eyes, as his host did. A sure 
peace descended on Johannes Lc^ius. The parching thirst, 
which only a moment ago had worried him, disappeared. He 
used this time to collect his thoughts, behind closed lids, and 
prepare the reasomng with which he intended to strive for the 
Armenians. God had led him here, in wondrous fashion, where 
perhaps he might find entirely unexpected allies. Monsignor 
Saven’s wish that, not Germans or neutrals, but Turks them- 
selves might be intermediaries — that absurd wish — ^had begun 
to seem feasible. When Lepsius opened his eyes again, the old 
sheikh’s face ^med bathed in warm sunlight. But the sheikh 
said nothing of the results of this trial of hearts; he only asked 
the pastor to tell him what service he felt he could possibly 
render. The important conversation began. 

Johannes Lepsius (at first the Turkish words came stiffly 
and slowly; he often turned to Nczimi to supply him with the 
right expression): “Through the great goodness of Sheikh 
Achmed Eifendi I have come her^ into this honourable 
tekkch, as a Christian and stranger. . . . You have even al- 
lowed me to be present at your religious exercises. The fervour 
and devotion with which I saw you strive after God has filled 
my heart with delight. Even if I, as an ignorant foreigner, can- 
not understand the innermost meaning of your holy customs, 
at least I was able to feel your great piety. . . . But, in view 
of this piety of yours, this religious feeling, the things that 
happen, are allowed to happen, in your country, seem to me 
all die more terrible.” 

The Young Sheikh (obtains with an upward glance, his 
father’s permission to speak) : “We know' how for manj' years 
you have been a warm friend of the ermeni millet. . . .” 

Johannes Lepsius: “More than simply their friend. I have 
devoted my whole life and strength to t^ ermeni millet.” 

551 



The Young Sheikh: “And now you warn to accuse us of 
what has been done to them?” 

Johannes Lepsius: “1 am a foreigner. A foreigner has never 
any right to make accusations. I am here, not to accuse, but 
only to complain, about these things, and to beg your help 
and your advice.” 

The Young Sheikh (with an obvious stubbornness, not to 
be softened by pleasant words) : “And yet you hold us Turks, 
in general, responsible for all that has happened^” 

Johannes Lepsius: “A people is made up of many parts: of 
the government and its executives, of those classes that stand 
behind the government, and of the opposition.” 

The Young Sheikh: “And which of these do you hold re- 
sponsible?” 

Johannes Lepsius: “For twenty years I have known your 
conditions well. Even in the interior. I have negotiated with 
the heads of your government. God help me — I must say itl 
To them alone attaches the full guilt of this wiping out of an 
innocent people.” 

The Turbeoak (raises his thm, fanatic’s head, with its piti- 
less eyes; his voice and being dominate the room immedi- 
ately): “But who was responsible for our government?” 

Johannes Lepsius: “I don’t understand your question.” 

The Turbedar: “Well, let me ask you another. Have Os- 
mans and Armenians always hved together uneasily ? Or was 
there not a time in which they lived at peace, side by side? 
You know our country, so I suppose you dso know our past.” 

Johannes Lepsius: “As far as I know, the big massacres did* 
not begin before the last century — after the Berlin Con- 
gress . . 

The Turbedar: “That answers my first question. At that 
Congress you Europeans began to meddle in the domestic 
affairs of the empire. You urged reforms. You wanted to buy 
Allah and our religion of us, for shabby sums. The Armenians 
were your commercial travellers.” 

55a 



Johannes Lepsius: “Did not that age, with its general de- 
velopment, demand those reforms more urgently even than 
Europe? And, after all, it was very natural that the Armenians, 
as the weaker, busier people, should have wanted them most." 

The Turbedar (dares up; his just wrath fills the whole 
room) : “But we don’t want your reforms, your ‘progress,’ your 
business activity. We want to live in God, and to develop in 
ourselves those powers which belong to Allah. Don’t you 
know that all that which you call activity, advancement, is of 
the devil.? Shall I prove it to you.? You have made a few super- 
ficial investigations into the essence of the chemical elements. 
And what happens, then — when you act from your imperfect 
knowledge? You manufacture the poison gases, with which 
you wage your currish, cowardly wars. And is it any different 
with your dying-machines? You will only use them to bomb 
whole cities to the ground. Meanwhile they only serve to 
nourish usurers and profit-makers, and enable them to plunder 
the poor as fast as possible. Your whole devilish restlessness 
shows us plainly that there is no ‘progressive activity’ not 
founded in destruction and ruin. We would willingly have dis- 
pensed with all your reforms and progress, all the blessings 
of your scientific culture, to have been allowed to go on living 
in our old poverty and reverence.” 

The Old Sheikh Achmed (attempts to bring a more con- 
ciliatory note into their talk) : “God has poured his draughts 
into many glasses, and each glass has its own form.” 

The Turbedar (can still not manage to calm down, since 
he feels that here he has found the right adversary on whom 
to vent his profoundcst bitterness) : “You tell us our govern- 
ment is guilty of all this bloody injustice. But, in truth, it is 
not our government, but yours. It went to school to you. You 
supported it in its criminal struggle against our most sacred 
treasures. Now it carries out your instructions, in your spirit. 
Therefore you yourself must admit that, not we Osmans, but 
Europe, and Europe’s hangers-on, are in truth responsible for 

553 



t}ie fate this people wbom you champicuL And dk! AraHB> 
nians are justly served, since it was they who wanted to bring 
hack these criminal traitors into our country. It was they who 
cherished them, and acclaimed them, in order that now they 
should be devoured. Can’t you yourself see the justice of God 
in these events? Wherever you and your disaples may go, you 
bring corruption along with you. You may do hypocritical 
hp-service to the religion of the prophet Jesus Christ, but in 
the depths of your hearts you beheve in nothing but the blind 
forces of matter, and eternal death. Your hearts are so dull 
that they know nothing of the powers of Allah, which wither 
vrithin them, unused. Yes, your religion is death, and all Eu* 
rope is the harlot of death!” 

The Old Sheikh (with a stern glance commands the Tur* 
bedar to control himself; then he strokes the pastor’s hand, as 
though to comfort and propitiate): “Everything hes within 
God’s purpose.” 

The Young Sheikh: “It’s true, Effendi, you can’t deny it. 
The nationalism which dominates us today is a foreign poison, 
which comes from Europe. Only a few decades ago our whole 
people lived faithfully under the banners of the prophet — 
Turks, Arabs, Kurds, Lasas, and many more. The spirit of 
the Koran nullifies earthly dificrenccs of blood. But today even 
the Arabs, who really had nothing to complain about, have 
become nationahsts, and our enemies.” 

The Old Sheikh: “Nationalism fills up the burning void 
which Allah leaves in the hearts of men when they drive Him 
out of them. And yet! Men cannot drive Him forth against 
His wUl.” 

Johannes Lepsius (sits with his legs crossed under him, as 
the personification of Europe accused; he does not however 
forget his object; therefore, he has listened amiably to the 
curses of the imposing Turbedar from Brussa; they hurt him 
far less than his squatting legs): “None of what you have 
said to me is new. I myself have often said much the sam^ to 

554 



mj £dbwH»Ujitx 7 aica. 1 am z Chnstko— in izct a Cfariadan 
prien;*— and in spite of this I gladly admit to you that many 
of the Christians whom I mett are no more than lukewarm, 
indifferent lip-servers ...” 

The TintBEDAR (still obstinately righteous, in spite of Sheikh 
Achmed’s silent reproof) : "So you see that not we Turks but 
your Christians are the real guilty.” 

Johannes Lepsius: “My religion commands me to see all 
guilt as the unavoidable heritage of Adam. Men and whole 
peoples cast this human guilt at one another, like a ball. It is 
impossible to assign its limits in time, or trace it back to any 
one event. Where should we begin, and where leave oif ? I am 
not here to speak even a word of reproach against the Turkish 
people. It would be a very great mistake. I am here to beg 
reconciliation.” 

The Turbedar: “You com^ asking to be reconaled, after 
having aroused the malice.” 

Johannes Lepsius: “I am no diauvinist. Every human being, 
whether he lives it or not, belongs to a national community, 
and remains a part of it. That is an obvious fact of nature. As 
a Christian, I believe that our Father in heaven created these 
differences between us, to teach us love. Since no love is pos- 
sible without diversity and tension. I too, by nature, am very 
different from the Armemans. And yet I have learned to love 
and understand than.” 

The Turbedar: "Have you ever cared to reflect how much 
the Armenians love and understand us? It was they who, like 
an electric wire, conducted your devil’s resdessness into the 
midst of our peace. And do you take them for innocent lambs? 
I tell you that, whenever they get a chance, they coldly 
slaughter any Turk who happens to be at their mercy. Perhaps 
you may not be aware that even your Christian priests are 
delighted to do their share in that kind of murder.” 

Johannes Lepsius (it is the first time that he has had to 
check himsdf from answering sharply): “If you s^y so, Ef' 

555 



fendi, I can only believe that such crimes have been com* 
mitted, here and there. But don’t forget what your hojas, 
mullahs, and ulemas have done to stir up your people. And 
besides, you are the strong, the Armcmans powerless.” 

The Turbedar (who, besides being learned, is skilled in 
polemic; he knows the art of retreating at once from the 
realms of the dangerously particular, into the fortified region 
of generalities): “You have strewn calumnies through the 
whole world against our religion. The most malicious is that 
of its intolerance. Do you really suppose that, if we had been 
so intolerant, there would be one Christian left alive in the 
empire governed for centuries by the Caliph? What did the 
great Sultan who conquered Istanbul do in the first year of 
his reign? Did he banish Christians from his territory? Did 
he? No, he set up the Greek and Armenian patriarchates, in- 
vesting them with power, splendour, freedom. But what did 
you Christians do in Spain? You drove the Moslems, who 
had made their homes there, into the sea, by thousands, and 
burned them alive. Do we send you missionaries, as you us? 
You only send out the cross before you so that the Baghdad 
railway and the oil trusts may pay better dividends.” 

The Old Sheikh: “The sun is arrogant and aggressive, the 
moon mild and full of peace. The Turbedar speaks harsh 
words, but not to you, who are our guest. You must under- 
stand that our people also are embittered at the misrepresenta- 
tion of our religion. Do you know which word most frequently 
beautifies the Koran, after the name of God^ The word. 
Peace! And do you know how it stands in the tenth sura: 
‘Once men were a single brotherhood. Then division came 
between them. But had God not sent forth His commandment, 
their division would have called down judgment upon them.’ 
But we too strive, just as the Christians do, after a kingdom 
of unity and love. We too do not hate our enemies. How is it 
possible to hate if the heart has opened itself to God? To bring 
peace is one of the chief duties of our brotherhood. Listen; 

556 



even this Tuihedar, who speaks so harshly, is one of our most 
zealous peace-makers. Long before your name became known 
to us, he was working on behalf of the exiles. And not only 
hej We have our peace-makers even among soldiers.” (He 
beckons to the infantry captain who, presumably as the young- 
est and least initiated brother of the order, is sitting on the 
mat farthest away from him.) 

The Captain (comes shyly to take his place next the old 
sheikh; he has big, gentle eyes and a sensitive face; only his 
carefully trained moustache helps him to the seventy of an 
ofBcer). 

The Old Sheikh: “You visited the Armenian concentration 
camps in the east, on our behalf?" 

The Captain (turns to Johannes Lepsius): “I am staff- 
captain in one of the regiments attached to the headquarters 
of your great countryman, Marshal Goltz Pasha. The pasha’s 
heart is also full of grief and pity for his Christian co- 
religionists. But he can do very litde to help them against the 
will of the Minister of War. I reported to him, and was given 
leave for my task. . . .” 

The Old Sheikh: “And which places did you visit on your 
journey?” 

The Captain; “Most of the concentration camps for exiles 
are on the banks of the Euphrates, between Deir ez-Zor and 
Meskene. I stayed several days in each of the largest.” 

The Old Sheikh: “And will you tell us what you saw 
there?" 

The Captain (an agonized glance at Lepsius): “I would 
much prefer not to tell you in front of this stranger. . . .” 

The Old Sheikh: “The stranger must learn to see that the 
infamy is that of our own enemies. Speak!" 

The Captain (stares at the floor, seeking for words; he is 
unable to describe the indescribable; his negative, hesitant 
words convey none of the stench of a reality at which he still 
shudders with disgust): "Battlefields are horrible. . . . But 

557 



the worst batdefi^ is nothing compared to Detr ez<2or. . . ; 
Nobody could ever imagine it." 

The Old Sheikh: "And what was worst?” 

The Captain: “They’re no longer human. . . . Ghosts. . . . 
But not the ghosts of human beings ... the ghosts of apes. 
It takes them a long time to die, because they chew grass, and 
can sometimes get hold of a piece of bread. . . . But the worst 
thing is that they’re all too weak to bury their tens of thou- 
sands of corpses. . . . Deir ez-Zor is a horrible cloaca of 
death ’’ 

The Old Sheikh (after a long pause) : “And how can they 
be helped?” 

The Captain: “Helped? The best anyone could do for them 
would be to kill them all ofi in one day. . . . I’ve sent a letter 
to all our brethren. . . . We’ve managed to find homes for 
over a thousand of the orphans in Turkish or Arab families. 
. . . But that’s scarcely anything.” 

The Tukbedar: “And what will the consequence be, if we 
take in these children, and care for them lovingly in our 
houses? The Europeans will only insist that we stole them, to 
sully and mishandle.” 

The Old Sheikh: “That is true, but beside the point.” (To 
the Captain) : “Did these Armenians see in you, a Turk, only 
an enemy, or could you manage to gain their confidence?” 

The Captain: “Their dehumanized misery is so great that 
they have ceased to be able to distinguish between friend and 
enemy. . . . Whenever I came into a camp, they came round 
me in swarms. . . . Usually there were only women and old' 
men, all half naked. . . . They roared with hunger. . . . The 
women scraped up my horse’s dung to pick out the undigested 
oat-grains. . . . Then later they almost tore me to bits wdth 
their prayers. . . . I’m loaded up with petitions, and messages, 
which I can’t deliver. , . . Here, for instance, this letter . . .” 

(He finds a filthy slip in his pocket and shows it to Johannes 
Lepsius.) 


55 ? 



*T%» was wiitten by one of your Chrisdan priests, of your 
persuasion. He was squatting beside bis wife’s i^uried corpse 
. . . she’d lain there three days. ... A very small, thin xnan, 
there was scarcely anything left of him. His name was Har- 
utiun Nokhudian, his home was somewhere on the Syrian 
coast. Most of the people in his neighbourhood took refuge on 
the top of a mountain. I promised to have the letter delivered 
to them. But how?” 

Johannes Lepsius (petrified by the horror of all this, has 
long since ceased to feel his cramped legs under him; on fhe 
letter which he takes from the captain he can read only the 
inscription, written in big Armenian letters, "To the priest of 
Yoghonoluk, Ter Haigasun”) : “So even this request will have 
to go unfulfilled, like all the others.” 

Agha Rifaat Bereket (his amber rosary has vanished into 
his sleeves; this frail old gentleman from Antakiya bows sev- 
eral times in httle, swaying movements to the sheikh) : “No, 
this request shall be granted. ... I myself will take Nokhud- 
ian’s letter to his friends. In the next few days I shall be on 
the Syrian coast.” 

The Old Sheikh (turns with a little smile to Lepsius): 
“What an instance of God’s power! Two brothers, strangers 
to one another, meet here, in this great city, so that the prayer 
of a wretched man may be granted. . . . But now you prob- 
ably know us better. This is my friend, the Agha from Antak- 
iya. . . . He’s not in the prime of lif^ as you arc; he has 
seventy years on his shoulders. And yet, for months, he has 
worked and travelled on behalf of the ermeni millet— good 
Turk as he is. Why, he’s even obtained audiences with the 
Sultan and the Sheikh ul Islam on their behalf.” 

Agha Rifaat Beeeket: “He who guides my heart knows its 
purposes. But unluckily the others are very strong, and we 
very weak.” 

'The Old Sheikh: “We are weak because thes^ lacke3rs of 
Europe have stolen religion from our people. It is as the Turbe- 

559 



dar said it, though in harsh words. Now you know the truth. 
But the weak are not afraid. I cannot tell whether your eflbrts 
for the Armenians are dangerous to you. But they can be 
very dangerous indeed both to the Agha and the captain. If 
a traitor or a government spy denounces them, they may dis- 
appear into jail for ever.” 

Johannes Lepsius (bends over Sheikh Achmed’s hand, but 
the kiss remains uncompleted, since the pastor finds that he 
cannot conquer his shame and reserve): “I bless this hour, 
and I bless your brother Nezimi, who brought me here. I 
had given up hope. But now I can hope again, that, in spite 
of all convoys and concentration camps, some part of the Ar- 
menian nation may still be saved, with your hdp.” 

The Old Sheikh: “That rests with God alone. . . . You 
must arrange a meeting with the Agha.” 

Johannes Lefsius: “Is there any chance of saving these men 
on Musa Dagh.^” 

The Txjrbedar (angry again, this sympathy with rebels is 
too much for his Osmamc heart) : “The Prophet says: ‘He who 
goes to the judge to plead for a traitor is himself a traitor. 
Since, wittingly or unwittingly, he stirs up disorders.’ ” 

The Old Sheikh (for the first time he has lost his dry 
shrewdness of manner; his eyes look a long way out, his words 
are indecipherably ambiguous): “Perhaps those who are lost 
are already in safety, and those in safety already lost.” 

Then the sheikh’s servant and the thick-set porter with the 
kind eyes brought coffee and lokum, Turkish sweetmeats. 
Sheikh Achmed with his own hands presented the coffee cup 
to his guest. Johannes Lepsius would have liked, before saying 
good-bye, to turn back their conversation to the Armenians. 
But he could not succeed. The old sheikh impassively refused 
all further discussion. But the Agha Rifaat Bereket promised 
the pastor to visit him that same mght in his hotel In three 
days he would have to leave Istanbul 


560 



At the Seraskdriat, Dr. Nezimi Bey took leave of Lepsius. 
They had walked the whole long way almost in silence. The 
Turk imagined that what he had just seen so impressed the 
pastor that his thoughts were too eagerly occupied to enable 
him to say a word. That was true, but in a different sense. A 
man set on one object has his head full to bursting of new 
ideas. The pastor was not so much thinking of this mysterious 
new world in which he had just been spending a few hours. 
He was thinking of the breach into the interior, which such 
miraculous hazard had suddenly opened. He kept squeezing 
Nczimi’s hand, to express his thanks, without saying a word. 
And such words as Nezimi said passed almo^st unheeded. The 
Turk was advising him to pay great attention, in the next few 
days, to all the minor incidents of his life. Any man honoured 
by Sheikh Achmed with “the test of the heart” would be sure 
to encounter many incidents which, if seen in thar true light, 
would be full of meaning. Alone, outside the Seraskeriat, 
Lepsius stared up at the windows of Enver's citadel. They 
glittered in the late afternoon sunlight. He rushed for a cab. 
“To the Armenian patriarchate!” Now all the spies in the 
world meant nothing to him. He burst in on the cadaverous 
patriarch. Monsignor Saven’s thought was miraculously on its 
way to being realized. Old-Turkish circles were helping the 
Armenians, though nobody had known it so far. The best 
among the Turks were enflamed with inextinguishable hate 
against their atheistic leaders. This fire must be used for their 
special purposes. . . . Monsignor Saven put his fingers to his 
lips imploringly. Not so loud— for Christ’s sakel The pastor’s 
quick mind was organizing a vast new scheme of assistance. 
The patriarchate was to get into secret touch with the great 
orders of dervishes, and so lay the foundations of a manifold 
and extensive work of assistance, which should grow till it 
became a definite rescue-work. The religious strata among 
the Turks must be strengthened in their fight by a new, strong 
impulse, and powerful opposition to Enver and Talaat de- 

561 



vdoped in the peq>Ie itsell Monugnor Saven was fax 
opdnusdc than Dr. Lepsius. None o£ all this was unknoum 
to him, he whispered, in a scarcely audible voice. Not all orders 
of dervishes were of this kind, llie greatest, most influentud, 
for instaxKc, the Mevlcvi and Rufai, were bhnd haters of the 
Armenians. Though they detested Enver, Talaat, and the 
other members of the Qjmmittee, they had nothing against 
the extermination. Lepsius refused to let his confidence be 
shaken. They must grasp any hands held out to them. He sug- 
gested that the patriarch himself should go in secret to see 
Sheikh Achmed. Nezimi Bey would arrange a meeting. But 
Monsignor Saven was so horrified at this darmg suggestion 
that he seemed rcheved when the temperamental pastor left 
his room. 

Lepsius dismissed his araba at the farther side of the bridge. 
He would walk the short way back to the Tokatlyan. After 
months of heavy depression, he felt today as marvellously 
light-hearted as though he had some great success to look 
back on. Yet really he had done nothing at all, only glimpsed 
a faint chink of light, from behind the iron door. His mind 
was so full of projects that he walked on further and further, 
past his hotel, along the Grande Rue de Pera. A dehciously 
cool evemng had descended. A clear green sky shimmered 
above the tree-tops of a park-hke boulevard. This was one 
of the best parts of the town. Here there were even street- 
lamps, which now began to light up, one by one. A car, at a 
moderate pace, came on towards him. It was lit up within. 
An officer and a fat civilian sat talking excitedly. Sudden 
vague terror parched Lepsius’s throat. He had recognized 
Enver Pasha — the glittering youth with the fresh complexion 
and long, girlish eyelashes. And his neighbour,* with his fez 
on one side and his white waistcoat, was no doubt Talaat Bey, 
as that minister appeared in many photographs. So now Lep- 
sius was again facing the great enemy. In his heart, strangely 
enough, he had always wanted to. He stood enthralled, look- 

56*' 



ing after the car. b had not gone on a hundred and fifty yarcb 
btiore two diots rang out, one after another. A juring of 
brakes. Indistinct figures sprang out of the shadows. Sharp 
voices began to brawl. Were they calling for help? The pastor 
shivered in every limb. An attempt to assassinate] Had fate 
overtaken Enver and Talaat? And would he be called as a 
witness? He was drawn irresistibly to the scene. He did not 
want to see, ^et could do no other. But he came reluctantly 
nearer the shouting group. Someone had lit a garish acetylene 
lamp, around which idlers gaped, giving loud advice. The 
chauffeur lay, cursing and grunting, under the car. But Enver 
and Talaat Bey stood peacefully side by side, puffing cigarette 
smoke. It was merely a puncture. The front tires had met 
some sharp obstacle on the road and burst; the machine was 
damaged. But the really ridiculous thing was that Enver had 
ceased to be Enver, Talaat, Talaat. The one had become a 
very ordmary-lookmg officer, the other a still more insignifi' 
cant business man or civil servant. The white piqu6 waistcoat 
was the one reality that remained. Lepsius cursed his fervid 
imagination, which could raise such spooks. "I’m crazy," he 
grunted to himself. 

But when, an hour later, Agha Rifaat Bereket sat in his 
room, he had quite forgotten the incident of the car. The’ 
Agha, in his turban and long blue cloak, was most out of place 
in this European hotel bedroom. Certainly he had nothing in 
common with the hard wooden chair on which he sat, the 
harsh, cold light of electric globes. Lepsius could see that this^ 
old gentleman, the Syrian caliph of the Sheikh of the Thieves 
of Hearts, was making a considerable sacrifice. Lepsius begged 
him to take five hundred pounds of his German relief fund, 
and use them, if he possibly could, on behalf of the men on 
Musa Dagh. Yet, in this, the pastor did not act as rashly as 
many might suppose. Those httle twinkling hands, he could 
see for himself, would be a safer deposit for his money, and 
probably would put it to better use. than all the powerless con- 

563 



states and missions. Perhaps, at last, it could really be spent 
as they intended. Ri£aat Bereket wrote out a very formal ns- 
ceipt, in elaborate calligraphy. It covered an entire page. He 
handed it ceremoniously to the: German. 

“I will send you a letter with paruculars of all my pur- 
chases.” 

“But— should you not succeed in getting your supplies on 
to the mountain?” 

“I have very good documents. . . . Don’t be afraid. What- 
ever I have left over I will share out among the concentration 
camps. And you shall receive particulars.” 

Lepsius asked him to address his letter to Nezimi Bey. That 
would be safer. He must, by Allah’s mercy, be prudentl They 
could not risk this new way being blocked. 

“So, after all, I haven’t come back to Istanbul for nothing.” 
Dr. Lepsius, back in his room, having conducted the Agha to 
. the street, was convinced of that. His pious visitor had left 
something of himself behind in the little bedroom, a deeper 
peace than heretofore. In the certain knowledge that today his 
work had advanced, the pastor got into bed. But now the men 
in the tekkeh came to life again, their strength, their eyes and 
faces, came crowding in on him. Till now he had not realized 
so clearly how much more forceful, larger than life, were these 
personalities, which today it had been granted him to meet: 
Sheikh Achmed, his son, the Turbedar. His thoughts strayed 
off into long disputations with them, which brought him sleep. 
But sleep did not last. Dull thunder woke him in the night. 
His windowpanes were rattling very oddly. This clatter was a 
familiar sound. The guns of the French and English fleets 
knocked for admission. He sat up in bed. His hand fumbled 
for the switch. But he could not find it. It was like a sharp 
stab in the heart. Had not Nezimi warned him to scrutinize 
every little incident? Anything might have its special signifi- 
cance. That “attempt” on Enver’s and Talaat’s lives. It had 
been a facet of truth, no empty delusion, but in deep organic 

5 ^ 



rektionship with Shdkh Achmed’s power. Lepsius boged 
to cbse his eyes against some glimpse of a God-forsaken pit 
which gaped beneath him. A deep awe invaded his spirit. Had 
he been granted a glimpse into the future, or only surrendered 
to some obscurely murderous thought in himself? The guns 
growled. The panes rattled. Absurdl Absurd! he tried to tell 
himself. But his feverish heart already knew that God had re- 
established His justice, before the scales had broken under 
their load. 



2 


Stephan Sets Out and Returns 

Hmk and the swimmers set forth under the eyes of the whole 
people, gathered at twihght round the North Saddle to see 
them go. It was the Erst time Gabriel had been absent from 
a pubhc occasion of such magmtude. Yet nobody seemed to 
miss the leader, the man who had beaten back the Turks in 
three great battles, the general whom these folk of the seven 
villages had to thank for the few remaimng thousand breaths 
they might still be permitted by fate to draw. 

But Stephan had lost most prestige. What a day of disasters! 
First, he had not been allowed to volunteer. He, the conqueror 
of the howitzers, had been considered too inferior to go with 
Haikl And not even that was enoughi His father had rated 
him in pubhc, degraded him m front of Iskuhi, in front of all 
the other fellows, whom he had scarcely won over to his side, 
to the rank of wcakhng. It was very natural indeed that the 
ambitious Stephan, wounded in his honour as he was, should 
not have reahzed the anxiety concealed in a few harsh words, 
and only felt contempt and dishke in them. 

And yet, even so, it might ail have come right again, had 
Maman, that very afternoon, not completed his father’s cruel 
work. In spite of the coarse and hideous words, whose mean- 
ing Stephan could only half understand, he had still no real 
conception of the incident, so pregnant in consequences. Or 
rather, whenever he tried to visualize it, his thoughts became 
confused, his grief intolerable, as it struggled nearer and nearer 
the truth. Then, like a runner, he clenched both fists in front 

■166 



his chest, astounded that a heart should have room in h &c 
so much burning agony. All ambition and vanity had been 
silenced. Only this burmng grief remained. Stephan had quar- 
relled with ^ father. He had lost his mother, in some ob- 
scure fashion more grievous than death. As the hours dragged 
on, it^rew clearer and clearer to hun that he could go back 
neither to one nor the other. In a curious way he felt cut o£F 
from them. Theyliad become enemies. For that very reason 
he must not go back to them, no matter how much all the 
child in him might cry out with longing to do so. Even be- 
fore he took his great decision, he had made up his mind to 
avoid Three-Tent Square. It was out of the question to meet 
Monsieur Gonzague again and share his sleeping-quarters, 
now that in the eyes of all the boys the Greek had become a 
mean scoundrel As evening approached, Stephan had made 
up his mind. He cut the knot of all these problems. He had 
crept into the sheikh-tent and hastily stuffed all that seemed to 
be necessary into his Swiss rucksack. Whatever else might 
suffer, he would never again eat at Maman’s table, or sleep 
in his bed. He would live on his own, apart from everyone — 
though how, it was still impossible to decide. Then, later, he 
stood a few minutes outside the doors of Juliette’s tent. It was 
laced up tight from inside. Not a word, or sound, from within. 
Only the faint hght of an oil lamp through the chinks. His 
hand was already reaching up for the drumstick of the little 
gong, which hung over the door. But he conquered his weak- 
ness and went stridmg off, with his rucksack on his shoulders, 
no longer stifling sobs. On the North Saddle he had come into 
the midst of the gathered crowds, waiting for the departure of 
Haik and the swimmers. No one would speak to him, the 
fallen hero I They all stared at him oddly and turned their 
heads. Often he heard such laughter behind him as froze his 
heart. At last Stephan lay down behind one of the defence- 
works, where he could stay unscathed and watch it all without 
being noticed. 


567 



First the two twinuners were sent with a blessing on their 
way. Since they were Protestants, it was Aram Tomasian who 
addressed them, fine Ter HaJgasun made the sign of the cross 
over their foreheads. Then pastor and priest led the young 
swinuners past the first trenches and over the bend of the 
Saddle, to the point where the shrub-grass slope rose north- 
wards. Thin smoke-streams from the distant forest fire im- 
pregnated this air— it almost imperceptibly veiled the moon, 
causing its metallic light to tremble, in vibrant haze. It really 
looked as though these swimmers and their escort were setting 
put into some beyond, steeped in light, but from which there 
could be no returning. The crowd would have liked to come 
surging after them. But the armed guards had formed a cordon 
and would only let relations come past it. Pastor Aram had 
arranged it so, in order that these last good-byes might not be 
encroached upon by strangers. The first fareivells were said 
by distant relatives and the boys’ godfathers. Each of these 
had some small gift to bestow— a few remnants of tobacco, 
some precious sugar, or even only a holy picture or a medal. 
The priests took care that these first proceedings should not 
be too long drawn out, and scarcely had the more distant rela- 
tives bestowed their gifts when they departed, with Ter Hai- 
gasun and Tomasian. Only their nearest and dearest wefe left 
for a short while with the swimmers. A short, strangled em- 
brace! The boys kissed their fathers’ hands. The mothers 
turned away sobbing. They waved disconsolately. Then, even 
their parents had left them alone. 

This, and what happened after it, filled the lonely Stephan’s' 
heart with a bitter-sweet grief. The swimmers were still not 
alone. Suddenly two girls were standing beside them. They 
were as like the boys as their two sisters. The crowd even 
was put to silence by the sight of these four young people, 
who disappeared together up the slope, hand in han^ into 
the vagu^ moonlit smoke-haze. But it was not long till the 

«;68 



were back again, slowly coming downMl, each apart 
from the other. 

Meanwhile Ter Haigasun had said a few words of admon- 
ishment to the Aleppo runner, blessed him, and crossed his 
forehead. This farewell was far quicker and more casual. The 
widow Shushik had neither any relatives in these parts, nor 
had she managed to make one friend. Strangers are always 
suspect. Nor had Widow Shushik herself so far made any at- 
tempt to consort with her neighbours. Her huge peasant 
hands had always fended for themselves. Therefore only 
Aram Tomasian and Ter Haigasun could accompany her, as 
now she offered up her sole remaining treasure, her Haik. 

Ter Haigasun, replacing his dead father, embraced and 
kissed the young Aleppo runner, and held out his hand for the 
boy to kiss. He and Aram had a sum of money to give to Haik, 
so that he might, if need arose, buy his life with bribes. They 
left the mother and son alone. But Shushik did no more than 
stroke Haik’s forehead in quick embarrassment, before she 
turned to follow the two priests. Yet Stephan nouced that 
she did not go back among the people, already streaming 
off towards their huts, but wandered indeasivdy away, m 
the direction of the rock barricades. 

It was the hrst time that Gabriel Bagradian had not spent 
a whole night in the north trench. For tonight the Council 
had given the command to Chaush Nurhan the Lion. Luckily 
no attack seemed possible. The scouts announced no threat- 
ening movement in the valley, only peaceful troops going 
about their normal soldiers’ routine along the village roads 
between Wakef and Kebussiyc. 

This sense of security possessed not only the garrison but 
Nurhan, who played cards with the elder men. They all were 
relaxed. The South Bastion was an almost undisciplined nest 
of deserters. Sentries kept leaving their posts to gossip with 
comrades. The commandant, who as a rule was not to be 

5 ^ 



joked with, even allonred his men to infringe one of the strict- 
est prohibitions and light several twig-fires. 

These freshly kindled bonfires and shouting voices enabled 
Stephan to make a quick dash over the crcstj on the opposite 
side, without being seen or hailed from the camp. He was in 
a hurry, since Haik must by now be well ahead. Stephan ran 
as hard as he could. The rucksack on his back was by no 
means heavy: five boxes of sardines, a few bars of chocolate, 
a couple of biscuits, a few underclothes. The thermos flask 
which his father had forgotten in the tent he had asked 
Kristaphor to fill with wint for him. These, and a rug, formed 
his whole accoutrement, apart from his kodak. Stephan could 
not bring himself to part with that Christmas present, the last 
in Paris, though he had used up every roll of film. It was 
sheer childishness. And, since Haik carried no weapon, he had 
also abandoned his intention of stealing a gun from one of the 
stands of arms. In a few minutes he had come to the counter- 
slope. There a long, wide clearing stretched in front of him, 
upon which, in cbbmg moonlight, unsullied here by any 
smoke-swaths, the Caucasian giantess Shushik sat erect. Her 
long, rigid legs, under spreading skirts, and the shadows cast 
by them, fantastically lengthened by the moon, covered a 
whole stretch of Musa Dagh. But Haik her son, bony and tall 
as he was, had nestled up to his mother like a suckling. He 
sat half in her lap, and kept his head buried in her breasts. It 
looked, in this marble hght, as though the woman had bared 
them, to let her almost grown-up child drink from her blood 
again. Haik, the dour, tough Armenian boy — the disdainful 
Haik — seemed to long to creep back for ever into his mother. 
His breath came short, with little sobs. Her own stifled grief 
kept forcing its way out of the giantess, as she stroked her 
sacrificed child. Stephan stood rigid in his hiding-place — 
ashamed at having to look at this, and yet not able to see 
enough of it. When Haik suddenly sprang up and helped hi* 
mother to her feet, Stephan felt as though his body were cut 

570 



in two. The widow’s son only said a few curt, admonishing 
words, and then at last: "Now you must go.” 

The uncouth Shushik at once obeyed, without inflicting the 
pain of another embrace upon her boy. She left him in a busy 
haste to end it quickly. Haik stood motionless, looking after 
her. His face twitched as she turned, but he did not raise his 
hand to greet her. When Shushik’s great shadow had disap- 
peared, he sighed with rehef and set out slowly. Stephan 
waited, in his hiding-place, to give Haik a little leeway. His 
companion must have time to forget these farewells before he 
ran after him. But young Bagradian had not reckoned with 
Hagop. That yellow-haired cripple, the “book-rcader,’‘ a sensi- 
tive boy, had not managed all day long to get young Stephan 
olf his conscience. He too had scoffed at his friend. True that 
Hagop had done his best to atone for treachery when tlie 
crowd began to chase Stephan. But cripples, like all other 
despised people, find it hard to repress a feeling of triumph 
when any superior, even their own friend, is degraded. So it 
was not enough. Hagop not only felt guilty, but very anxious. 
He was full of presenuments. For hours he had been looking 
about for Stephan, hopping with wild nimbleness round the 
enclosure and all the other places where boys assembled. He 
had even dared to spy into Juhette’s tent, through a chink in^ 
the canvas door. He could not nd his mind of what he had 
seen: the tall, white woman stretched out like a corpse on the 
bed, and the leader, standing and staring down at her, as 
though he were dreaming where he stood. Then, when the 
one-legged Hagop had caught sight of Stephan with his ruck- 
sack in the crowd that had come to say good-bye to the mtt- 
sengers, his vague fears had become certainties. Now, panting 
with the exertion, he held on to Stephan. 

“You mustn’t do that. Nol You’ve got to stay here!” 

Stephan with a brutal shove sent Hagop spinning to the 
ground. “You’re a dirty dog. I don’t want anything more to 
do with you.” 


57 * 



Gd}rid[’s son was not of die kind who forgive easily. But 
Hagop caught him by the leg. “You aren’t to go. I won’t let 
you. You’re to stay here.” 

“Let me go, or I’ll give you a kick in the face.” 

The cripple hauled himself up by Stephan; he hissed 
despairingly: “You’ve got to stay. Your mother’s ill! You don’t 
know yet . . .” 

Even this did not lure. Stephan only hesitated a second. 
Then he drew down the corners of his mouth. “I can’t do any- 
thing for her. . . .” 

Hagop hopped a few steps backwards. “Don’t you know 
you’ll never come back here — that you won’t ever see her 
again?” 

Stephan stood for a while and stared at the ground; but 
then he turned and began to run after Haik. 

Hagop still panted after him. “I’m going to shout — I’ll wake 
them. . . . They’ll lock you up. . . . I’ll shout, I tell you!” 
And indeed he began. But his thin voice could only carry 
far enough to stop Haik, who was still not two hundred yards 
away from them. The Aleppo runner turned and stood still. 
Stephan rushed to meet him, with Hagop following, scarcely 
a hand’s breadth after his two-legged friend. 

To prevent Hagop’s voice from cutting across him Stephan 
shouted as he ran: “Haik, I’m aiming along with you.” 

The “people’s messenger” let the two come along before 
he answered. He scrutinized Stephan, half closmg his serious 
eyes. “Why are you keeping me back? I can’t afford to lose 
a second.” 

Stephan clenched resolute ffsts. “I mean to come with you to 
Aleppo.” 

Haik had cut himself a suck. He held it out like a weapon, 
as though to impede the unauthorized intruder. “I’m sent by 
the Council of Leaders, and Ter Haigasun has blessed me. 
You haven’t been either sent or blessed. . . 

Hagop, whom Haik’s presence always made bmid and 

57 * 



raidter fawmog^ repeated this with malidous zeal ‘You haven't 
been sent or bless^ To you it’s £ofbidden.” 

Stephan gripped the end of Haik’s stick, which he pressed 
like a hand. “There’s enough room for you and me." 

‘It isn’t a question of you and me. It’s a question of the letter 
which I’ve got to deliver to Jackson.’’ 

Stephan slapped his pocket in triumph. “I copied out the 
letter to Jackson. Two arc better than one.” 

Haik planted his stick on the groimd, firmly, to put an 
end to it. “Always trying to be cleverer than anyone.’’ 

This, too, Hagop faithfully echoed. But Stephan gave not 
an inch of ground. “You do as you like! There’s enough room. 
You can’t stop me going to Aleppo.’’ 

“But you can stop the letter from reaching there.’’ 

“I’m no worse a runner than you.” 

That scornful note crept into Haik’s voice, which so often 
before had made Stephan wild. “Can’t ever stop brag- 
ging. , . .” 

After all today’s intolerable wounds, this was too much for 
Stephan. He sat on the ground and hid his face. But Haik 
let him feel all his disdain. 

“Crying already — and that says it wants to go to Aleppo!” 

Stephan could only sob: “I can’t go back — Oh, Jesus Christ 
— ^I— can’t go back. . . 

Now perhaps Haik got an inkling of what was happening 
in Stephan. He may perhaps have thought of Shurik, his 
mother. Perhaps he even felt he would like a companion on 
the long, dangerous way. Who can say what he thought.? But 
at least his manner became far more conaliatory as now he 
remembered Stephan’s words. “You’re quite right. There’s 
plenty of room for you, too. No one can stop you.” 

But Hagop summoned up all his courage for one desperate 
objection. “What? I can stop him. Christ Saviour— I’ll go and 
tell the leaders.” 

This was the stupidest thing he could have said. It was these 

5 ?? 



few words brought the decision, since they put Haik in a rage. 
Serious and tall as he was^ Haik, in the depths of his hearty 
still obeyed the moral code of schoolboys — that one funda- 
mental law of their being, which all the world over is the 
same: no squeaiingl It made no difference what you squealed 
for, or when. To squeal remained the one unforgivable crime. 
So Haik, with his brutal frankness, turned on the cripple: 
“Tell the leaders, will you.? Before you do, I’ll knock your one 
leg so lame that you won’t be able to crawl back home on it.” 

Hagop hopped back, a good long way, in sheer alarm. He 
knew Haik, whose habit it was to carry out his threats with 
two iron fists. Haik could not abide the fair-haired Hagop. 
This opposition had provoked all his natural tyranny. It 
turned the scale in Stephan’s favour. Now came his matter-of- 
fact question: “Have you got enough to eat for five days? 
It’ll take as long as that-— if we get there, that is.” 

Stephan thumped his knapsack magnificently; he might 
have had supplies for a long expedmon in it. And Haik made 
no further mquiries. He ordered curdy: “Well, quick march! 
You’ve made me waste too much time as it is!” 

He had not said which way Stephan was to march — back to 
the camp, or on to Aleppo with him. He went striding on, and 
concerned himself no further with the others. Stephan kept 
close on his heels. So that Haik had not taken Stephan with 
him, but only allowed him to come along. Certainly there 
was “plenty of room” in the trackless mountains. 

Hagop stood undecided, watching the people’s messenger 
and the runaway till they disappeared over the top of the next 
moonlit slope. It took him nearly an hour to hop back to the 
Town Enclosure. Stephan’s senseless flight weighed like a 
rock on him. What ought he to do.? In his family’s hut they 
were all asleep. His father growled a few sleepy words of 
reproof at him for being so late. Hagop, without undressing, 
flung himself down on his mat and stared up at the roof of 
branches, through which faint moonshine was filtered, as 

574 



through a close sieve. He had still not managed to get to sleep 
when Avakian, long after midnight, came in to wake the 
whole family. Poor Hagop confessed at once, and led Gabriel, 
Kristaphor, Avakian, and the other men whom Gabriel had 
summoned to help him to the place where he had left Ste^ 
phan and Haik. Search parties were sent out at once. It was 
sunrise before Gabriel got back, having searched m vain, with 
Kevork the dancer. The boys had got much too far ahead. 
Nor had Haik followed the route set by the Council, but let 
his own sure instinct guide him. 

While the swimmers, skirting the Cape Ras el-Khanzir, were 
directing their steps with certainty towards Arsus, the village 
on the coast, the boys walked on all night long, by difficult 
up-and-down paths through the mountains. Haik had been 
warned to remain as long as he possibly could on the safe 
mountain ridges till he came to the southern end of the val- 
ley of Beilan. Then, having come down on to the plain via 
Kyrk-Khan, he was to keep along near the big highroad 
which leads to Aleppo by way of Hammam. These moonht 
August nights would make it easy for him to push on over 
reaped maize-fields and burnt-up plains, where he would find 
enough cover if he were threatened. But as he came nearer 
the big town, he must venture out on to the highroad and 
jump into one of the peasants’ carts loaded with maize or 
liquorice-root. With God’s help he could hide in it and get 
past the military barriers into the outskirts of the town. But, 
whatever happened, the letter to Mr. Jackson must not be 
found on him. Haik explained all this precisely to Stephan, 
giving gruesome pictures of dangers and obstacles which they 
would meet, the instant they touched the plain. Here in the 
empty mountains it was still child’s play. After about an hour’s 
walk the goats’ path, which Haik, without seeing it, sensed 
with his feet, dipped into the valley. 

The people’s messenger stopped and admonished Stephan; 

575 



‘I'^bw's your time, if you want to turn back. You can’t ^ 
lost Think it over! Later you won’t be able to do it” 

Stephan made an angry movement. But his heart was full 
of doubts. His reasons for running away from home seemed 
suddenly not quite so valid as they had been. 

Haik pointed to the Damlayik, where a far, red shimmer 
still showed the woods to be on fire. “You’ll never get back 

there, and see them again 

Young Bagradian still could not manage to find out what 
he really wanted. He would rather have died than let Haik 
think that he was soft. Shamefaced, he pulled out the map of 
this neighbourhood which had once hung in Uncle Avetis’s 
study. He pretended, with a solemn face, to be doing his best 
to get his hearings in the clear moonlight. But Haik, annoyed 
by such “stuck-up twaddle,” struck the map out of Stephan’s 
hand and wasted no further good advice. This brought out 
all Stephan’s resolution. He’d show him! Why, he could 
march much better than Haik! He began to walk on, at a 
crazy pace, straining every muscle to ure the other. But Haik 
did not so much as think of allowing Stephan to force him 
to an idiotic speed. He kept an even pace, almost a slow one. 
Stephan’s heart stood still. He was alone! Instead of “showing” 
Haik, he had only managed to lose his way and — he could feel 
— ^without help from the other, would never manage to find it 
in this wilderness. His heart thumped, but he dared not calL 
When, after one eternal minute, Haik came out through 
some bushes into the moonhght, not troubling even to notice 
the independent one, Stephan submitted ip silence to the 
stronger, though he pretended not to have had this shameful 
experience. That settled their long struggle once and for all. 
Haik was supreme. They soon came mto the narrow valley. 
On their right was the long, straggling village of Sanderan. 
Thank God, not a light was burning in it! Only one naca] 
human voice could be heard, raised in a subdued hum. It was 
a hair-raising sensauon to go creeping past i nh abited houses, 

576 



ivith deadi in all erf than. But the wild dogs of Sanderan could 
not be tricked; they picked up the trail of the young Arme^ 
nians, and followed them a long way past the village. Haik, 
with his incredible certainty, found another goat-track, lead- 
ing north-west, back into the mountains. As once again they 
walked through a sparse wood, drenched in moonlight, a sense 
of wild adventure crept into Stephan. The air was so freshi 
He forgot everything. He would have liked to shout and sing. 
Was there such a thing as being tired? By sunrise, in spite of 
several halts, they had covered a distance of nearly ten miles, 
and reached the place where the mountains slope down north- 
wards in wide terraces of woodland. Stephan, map and all, 
would have been quite lost 

Haik sharply pointed their direction. “We’ve got to go that 
way. Bcilanl” 

He could sense it all, though he had only been to Beilan 
once in his life, with his mother, that is to say, riding on 
donkey-back, and even so by quite a different way, along the 
coast. Now he was pleased, and said they had better himt out 
a sleeping-place and rest till midday. That short sleep would 
have to be enough; otherwise it wasn’t to be managed. Haik 
did not need to nose round for long before finding a shady 
place, with good turf to sleep on, and even a stream; though 
that was, perhaps, not such a miracle in these watered sur- 
roundings of Musa Dagh. For Haik, whose very skin made 
him aware of the hidden pecuharities of every strip of ground, 
the least alteration of temperature, any difference in vegeta- 
tion or of animals near him, it was nothing at all to pick out 
water. The boys set up their camp beside the stream, which 
here, even, formed just the kind of pool they had been looking 
for. They slaked their thirst. And then, to Haik’s amazement, 
this child of the West pulled a cake of soap out of his ruck- 
sack and began to wash himself. Haik watched these super- 
fluous proceedings with serious, sarcastic eyes. When Stephan 
had done, he dipped his feet deliciously into the cold pool, 

577 



since feet were what mattered. Then they swapped food with 
all the pleasure of youth. Shushik had given her son three big 
sausages stufFed with finely chopped mutton, fat, and onions 
and a loaf as hard as stone — ^though Heaven knows how she 
had got hold of It. It was the worst crime on the Damlayik to 
hide bread or flour or corn of any kind, punished by several 
days’ fasting. Yet such secret treasures kept appearing in the 
huts, and their origin still remained a mystery. It is always 
the same old story. No legal rationing, not even the most 
drastically controlled, can quite dam up the creative torrent 
of hfe, which always succeeds in producing the incredible, out 
of nothing. 

It was almost symbolic that Stephan should have offered 
French sardines and Swiss chocolate in exchange for mutton 
sausage and stale bread. Haik scarcely knew the names of 
such foreign dainties. The boys did not control their appetites, 
but made big inroads into their supplies without even think- 
ing of tomorrow. 

Suddenly Haik remembered, packed his away, and advised 
Stephan: “Better drink water and save the food.” 

So it was done. They drank great gulps of spring water out 
of the aluminum top of the thermos fla^, and Stephan mixed 
in some of his wine. He felt as well as though this were a 
holiday excursion, and not the expedition of two Armenians 
menaced on all sides, on their way into the pitiless town — an 
expedition which he had neither the right nor ability to take 
part in. All his grief seemed left behind, once and for all, on 
the Damlayik. How deliciously exciting it seemed to be rest- 
ing here, having walked all night, in the harmless, pleasant, 
morning sunshine. Stephan folded up his rug for a pillow. 
The sunshine warmed him more and more. He sat up again to 
ask like a child: “Do you think there’ll be any wild animals?” 

The self-important Haik pulled out his clasp-knife and 
laid it beside him. “You needn’t worry. Even when I’m asleep, 
I see everything.” 


578 



Stephan was not worrying in the least. What a good watcher, 
even when asleep, Haik was! Never before had he felt more 
nestling trust in a human being than he did in this rough 
boy, for whose admiration he had striven so hard. He sur> 
rendered utterly to his leadership. He fell asleep. His hand 
fumbled to seek his friend. 

“Now we must make tarbushes,” explained Haik, “so that we 
won’t be noticed if we meet people.” He unfolded his aghil 
sash and wound it adroitly round his felt cap. Stephan did his 
so badly that Haik had to help him. While adjusting the head' 
gear of the prophet he instructed the inexperienced one: “If 
necessary you’ll have to copy me. Do everything exactly the 
way I do it. And don’t ever talk.” 

It was late afternoon. Between the top branches of oaks and 
beeches a golden sky, full of swarming carrion birds. The 
boys had been nearly six hours on the road. But the word 
“road” is euphemistic. Far and wide, there was not so much 
as a goat-path. They had forced their way along the dried-up 
beds of streams which would be sure to lead them into the 
valley. Literally they had “forced their way,” impeded at every 
step by masses of resistant undergrowth, clinging creepers, and 
walls of shrubs, as hard and elastic as rubber, but barbed all 
over with long prickles. Incredible how many terraces and 
rocky steeps they had already had to clamber down. The moun- 
tain seemed always to have nothing more to say, and never 
to come to the end of what it was saying. Stephan had ceased 
to feel his body. His hands, his knees, his legs were covered 
with scratches and wounds. For hours he had said nothing. 
But not complained. Now they were sitting together on a bare 
rock, overlooking the chalk-white highroad from Beilan. It 
looked brand-new. Stone heaps all along it indicated the work 
of human hands. And indeed this by-road, which linked up 
the harbour of Alexandretta with the plains of Aleppo, and so 
the Mediterranean with all Asia, was a tribute to the u^eashed 

579 



energy) the power, of Jemal Pasha, the Syrian dictator. That 
iron-willed generd had ordained that Within a month the 
wretched, broken track should have become an impeccable 
highway, smooth and properly underpinned — and lol it was 
done. The Turks were amazed at the energy they found they 
possessed. At this pomt, under Stephan’s and Haik’s eyes, the 
road took a bend eastwards. They could look down on only 
a small section of it: not a man or vehicle, no mule or horse, 
came into sight, only here and there a hare or squirrel flitted 
across the white cha^ ribbon. Stephan gazed down with long> 
ing eyes at its smooth possibilities. But even Haik seemed to 
be yielding to temptation. Without having said a word to 
Stephan to warn him how imprudent it was to do so, he 
jumped up and ran down the slope. When they felt the smooth 
road under their feet, it was like a drink when one is thirsty. 
All Stephan’s ambition and energy were renewed. He kept 
pace with Haik. Right and left, steep banks began to rise. 
The road had become almost a tunnel, a narrow pass between 
two chfis. This oddly enough mereased their sense of security, 
and with it their carelessness. Then the cliifs widened out a 
httle, the road took a steep downward inchne. Another bend 
and the plain would surely open out! This road carried irre- 
sistibly onwards; they were borne, so to speak, along its cur- 
rent. Straight to disaster! Since when they came round the 
bend, they found, not the plain in front of them, but a Turkish 
guard-house, over which waved the half-moon flag. Four 
horrible-looking saptiehs lounged m front of it. A detachment 
of inshaat taburi were working away along the edge with 
spades, mattocks, and hammers. The travellers had been too 
exhausted to catch the sounds of their picks and shovels, the 
hoarse, dreary song of these labourers. They were so terror- 
stricken that even Haik took a full minute before he moved. 
But then he snatched Stephan’s hand and tugged him away. 
They went galloping off round the bend, up among the trees. 
Unluckily the place was bare of rocks or shrubs to bidf in. 

580 



lEliere were only the deodo* etems c£ yotmg beeche$, wludii 
gave no cover. The slope ascended gently. Where did it lead? 
Haik’s inner eye had a vision o£ the head sapdeh bending 
ward, shading his eyes, growling out an order, and giving 
chase;, with Im whole corps. It was worse than a nightmare. 
Voices I The leaves began to rusde with Turkish steps, Stephan 
shut his eyes and kept close to Haik, who flung his left arm 
round his body. Haik’s right hand gripped his open clasp- 
knife. They prepared for death. But the sharp whisper they 
heard was not in Turkish. 

“Boys! Boys! Who are you? Don’t be afraid!” 

These Armenian words came sepulchrally. When Stephan 
opened his eyes, it was to see a ragged Armenian soldier emerge 
breathless between the tree-stems. A scrubby skull, with eager 
eyes in it. Even to the eyes, the man was not unlike Kilikian. 
Haik controlled himself, put away his knife. The road- 
mender’s voice shook with excitement. 

“Aren’t you the son of the big widow Shushik, who has her 
house on the road to Yoghonoluk? Don’t you know me?” 

Haik approached the skeleton incredulously; loose rags 
enveloped its bones, its feet were bare. He eyed it sharply. 

“Vahan Melikentz, from Azir?” He sounded as hesitant as 
though he were trying to pick up a name at random. The 
labourer-private nodded an eager bead; tears had begun to 
trickle into his bristles, so moved he was at meeting his two 
young countrymen. Haik had only guessed at his name. What 
had this ragged scarecrow to do with Mehkentz, the dignified, 
gossiping bee-keeper he had met almost every day? 

Mehkentz raised despairing hands. “Are you crazy? What 
do you want to come here for? Thank Christ Saviour, the 
onbashi didn’t catch sight of you. Yesterday, down there by 
the bend, they shot five Armenians, a family trying to get to 
Alexandretta.” 

Haik, once again in full self-possession, gave the ex-bee- 
keeper a dignified account of his missbn. 

581 



Melikentz was horrified. "The road’s full of inshaat tsd>tiri, 
as far as Hatnmam. And yesterday two companies came into 
Hammam. They’re to be sent against the Damlayik. All you 
can do is to walk at night along by the Ak Denis swamp. But 
then you’ll fall in.” 

“We won’t fall in, Melikentz,” Haik declared, with laconic 
certainty. And he asked his countryman to show him the 
nearest way to the plain. 

Vahan Melikentz mourned: “If they miss me, or I’m late 
falling in. I’ll get the third-degree bastinado. Perhaps they may 
shoot me. ... I wish they wouldl You lads have no idea bow 
litde I care. Oh, if only I’d gone along with your lot, and not 
with Nokhudian the pastor! You were the clever ones! Christ 
help you! He hasn’t helped us!” 

And Melikentz was m fact risking death to show them their 
way. Yet they had only to go on by a short, fairly easy stretch 
of woodland. The poor bee-keeper talked contmually; he 
seemed to want to recover a whole lost harvest of unused 
words, if only to scatter it, before his last breath. The fate of 
those on Musa Dagh seemed to interest him less than describ- 
ing his own. So that Stephan and Haik learned something of 
what had been done to Nokhudian’s followers. All the able- 
bodied men among them had been told off from the rest in 
Antakiya, and sent to Hammam for road-building. Their 
women, children, the old and sick, had been driven on towards 
the Euphrates. Pastor Nokhudian had managed to get nothing 
from the Kaimakam — ^nothing at all! But the Armeman 
inshaat taburi were being used in a very special way. To each 
detachment was assigned a parucular stretch of road, which 
had to be finished off at double-quick time. When the onbashi 
reported the task as completed, the detachment was drummed 
together, herded into the nearest wood, and there neatly dis- 
patched, with a quick volley, by a special firing-party, expert 
by now at this routine. 

“Our bit of road,” said Melikentz dryly, “goes as far as Top 

582 



Boghazi; that’s about another four thousand paces. It’ll be 
about six or seven days, at most, if we’re clever. Then it’s our 
turn. So if they shoot me today I’ll only have lost six, or at 
most, seven days.” 

Yet, in spite of his simple calculation, Mclikentz left them 
in breathless haste, having brought them where he could point 
out their way. Six days of horrible living were, after all, six 
days more of life. As he said good-bye, he gave Haik a lump 
of Turkish honey, given him by a compassionate Mussulman 
woman. 

A rusty sunset was in the sky when they found themselves 
standing on the last, the lowest, of the mountain slopes. Flat 
land spread before them to the horizon. They were looking 
over a wide lake, in whose milky flatness the insipid sunset 
palely glistened. It was the Lake of Antioch, of which distant 
glimpses were to be had even from certain points of the 
Damlayik. But here Ak Denis, the “white sea,” looked so 
near, you could almost touch it. The northern ridge of the 
lake was girdled with a broad belt of reeds, alive with plung- 
ings and cawings. Clumsy-winged herons, silver and purpl^ 
flapped out of these reeds, to circle low above the lake, draw- 
ing ornate legs slowly after them that cut the surface of the 
water. Then they sank slowly down to brood. A wedge of 
wild ducks clattered with the swiftness of torpedoes through 
the milky flood, to land among the reeds on an island. From 
where they stood the boys could hear the bickerings of reed- 
thrushes, the human, almost pohtical disputation of ten thou- 
sand inflated, gigantic frogs. This reedy fringe of Ak Denis 
ebbed away gradually into the plain. Far out there were still 
thick clusters, but also there were stagnant pools, blind eyes, 
the whites of which looked tremulous. In contrast to the empty 
steppes this belt of urgent life along the lake seemed almost an 
exaggeration. It extended like the corpse of a fabulous dragon, 
being gnawed at by ornate birds of prey. 

Whereas Stephan saw only the lakc^ Haik’s sharp eyes had 

583 



at once spied out the nomad tents strewn here and tl^re aka^ 
the east, the few horses, browsing with hanging heads in the 
smoky void. He pointed, certain of their direction. “That’s 
our way. Between the road and the swamp. We’ll get on, as 
soon as the moon rises. Here, give us your flask! I’ll go for 
some water. Here, the water’s still good to drink. We must 
drink a lot. Meantime, you can get some sleep.” 

But Stephan did not sleep. He only waited till his mate got 
back with two brimming flasks. Obediently he drank as much 
as he could. Neither thought of eatmg. Haik spread his rug 
to wrap himself into it. But Stephan crept up to him. It was 
no longer enough to sleep as they had that morning, in cool 
proximity. Now he could not hide his fearful need of friend- 
ship and love. And lo! Haik understood. Haik was no longer 
dour and reserved; Haik did not keep him at arm’s length. 
Indeed he almost seemed to welcome the confiding closeness 
of young Bagradian. Like an elder brother, he drew him 
close and covered him. The two boys slept in each other’s 
arms. 

Haik and Stephan were in the plains. But now, against all 
expectation, they found that the rough, uneven Musa Dagh, 
full of clefts and gullies, had been far easier to walk on than 
this flat expanse, called El Amk, the “sinking ground.” This 
sly, uncertain soil, covered with a greenish scuri, was already 
hostile no longer Christian earth. 

It was charaaeristic of Haik, with his sharp senses and 
almost superhuman sureness of nerve, to have chosen this way 
— at night especially. El Amk was really nothing but a gol, 
a swamp, about twdve miles long, the hair-thin edge of which 
would have to be kept to. There were not many shepher ds, 
peasants, or nomads with courage enough to use this short- 
cut, to save themselves the long journey by road to the Kara- 
Su bridge. But it was the only way the hoys could have chosen, 
^ce Vahan Mdikentz had warned them of soldiers, sapii^hiej 

584 



iodiaat t^niri along du whole lengdi of the highroad. 
Haik had taken o£F his shoes, to be able to “get the feel” of 
the ground with his bare fut. Stephan did likewise. He had, 
as we know, long ceased to vie with his companion. They 
walked on the very thin, warm crust of a loaf, with the dough 
beneath them. This crust was cracked all over, and through 
the cracks rose dense, sulphurous vapours. Stephan proved in- 
telligent enough to follow close on Haik’s tracks, who, like 
a dancer, stepped out gingerly, with close attention, as though 
each step had been prescribed. 

During this dance confused thoughts kept invading Stephan, 
they rasped and cackled in him. “Everyone goes along a rr>ad. 
Why can’t we go along a road? . . . Oh, why are we Arme- 
nians?” 

Haik shut him up, enraged: “Don’t talk such loi! Better look 
put where you’re going. Don’t step where it’s green. Under- 
stand?” 

So then Stephan did his best to relapse into the mental coma 
which helps us most to put up with bodily discomfort. He 
curvetted faithfully after Haik, engaged in picking out a way 
full of the oddest curves on this perilous crust. Thus they con- 
tinued an hour — two hours — during which the moon at times 
lighted their way benevolently, only to vanish in evil caprice. 
Yet in spite of all the long way they had come, Stephan’s 
exhaustion seemed rather to diminish as the night wore on. 
Dregs — ^half thought, half emouon — began to collect, like 
sediment, in his mind. It could not be controlled. He had to 
say it, no matter how afraid he nught be of Haik: “I say, is 
it true that we aren’t going to sec our people” (he avoided 
any more intimate designation) “ever again?” 

Haik did not stop his figured progress. It was some time 
before, on firmer ground again, he gave any answer. What he 
said, m spite of its Christian certitude, was said with clenched 
fisu, rather than with folded hands. “I shall certainly see 
mother again.” 


585 



It was the first piece of intimate self-revelation that Stephan 
had had from Haik’s lips. But, since Stephan, the lycSen, had 
not the certain faith of a race of tough Armenian mountaineers, 
he became subdued, and replied uncertainly: “But we can’t 
ever get back on to the Damlayik.” 

It was obvious from Haik’s savage growl, ready to springs 
how much this talk went against the grain. 

“The Damlayik’s behind us. If Christ wills, we shall get 
to Aleppo. There Jackson will hide us in the consulate. That’s 
what It says in the letter.” And, spitefully: “Of course, there’s 
nothing about you in it.” 

But by now Stephan’s thoughts were not in the least con- 
cerned with himsdf, only with his father and mother, from 
whom he had so stupidly run away. Why? He himself no 
longer knew. All life had strangely shifted its perspective. The 
Damlayik had become the wildest nightmare, everything that 
had happened before it, reality. The sole reality. Well-ordered, 
clean, just as it should be. Jackson would put an end to all 
this nonsense. After all, it simply couldn’t happen that a 
Stephan Bagradian should find himself in such a position that 
he would never see his parents again. His thoughts were in a 
sense becoming Jackson’s— full of helpful schemes. 

“Jackson’ll cable. You cable to America, you know. Do you 
think the Americans’ll send ships to fetch our people.?” 

“How should I know that, you sheep?” 

Haik’s increasing pace betrayed his vsTath. The awed 
Stephan was forced to swallow down his need, and hurry to 
keep up with his leader. Though there was no wind, he felt 
as though a gale were swirhng against him, preventing him 
from going a step further. Try as he might, he could not 
manage to get all this straight in his mind. His head swam. 
A stark beam of moonlight filled the whole world. An 
emerald-green streak of it streamed in upon him. For a second 
he forgot their danger. 

The scream pulled Haik up short. He knew instantly what 

586 



had happened. A shadowy Stephan struggled for life. He had 
already sunk in up to the knees. 

Haik hissed at him: “Quiet! Don't kick up such a row!” 

But uncontrollable panic forced scream upon scream out of 
Stephan. He could not prevent them. He believed himself 
fallen between the jaws of a slimy whale; the monster sucked 
him slowly in, turning him over on its tongue. Already the 
pulpy, tumid mass was above his knees. Yet, in spite of it 
sdl, the seconds in which he did not struggle were oddly peace- 
ful, and did him good. 

Haik commanded: “One foot first. The right! Your right 
foot!” 

Stephan, letting out httle screams of terror, made useless 
movements. His legs had no strength left in them. Now 
came another, sharp command: 

“Lie over on your belly!” 

He bent forward obediendy, so that he could just touch 
dry land with his finger-dps. When Haik saw that Stephan 
had not the strength to fend for himself, he wriggled flat on 
his face to the marshy place. But even the suck, gripped by 
the struggling Stephan, was not enough to give him sufficient 
strength. Then Haik undid his turban-cloth and threw it out 
to Stephan to knot round his chest. He held on like iron to 
the further end of it. It served as a kind of life-lme. After 
endless efforts Stephan could at last free his right leg, which 
had not sunk in so very deep. Half an hour had passed before 
Haik drew him up hke a drowning man on to firm ground. 
Another half-hour elapsed before Stephan had recovered 
enough strength to stumble on, along the dangerous way, with 
Haik keeping hold of his hand. He was covered in slime, well 
up to his chest. In the air, it dried quickly, and under its thick 
crust the skin of his arms and legs contracted. It was indeed 
lucky that Stephan had put his shoes in his rucksack and 
thrown the rucksack. far away from him on to dry ground 
while he was struggling. 


587 



Haik firmly led his half-swooning friend. He did' fibf 
mand him for his carelessness, but repeated several time^ 
like an incantation: “We’ve got to be over the bridge before 
it gets light. There may be saptiefas there.” 

All that was left of pride and ambition in young Bagradian 
came into play again. “Yes, I can walk ... all right again . . . 
now.” 

As they turned northward, the ground became firmer. It was 
less like walking on a mattress. Stephan let go of Haik and 
pretended he could step out briskly. A distant glitter, a breath 
of coolness. Haik sensed the Kara-Su river. &on they were 
dambering up the dam on to the road, which lit up the night 
like a broad beam. The sentry-box on the bridge was empty. 
The boys— as though the devil were chasing them— raced past 
this, the greatest of all dangers, which, luckily, had ceased to 
be perilous. But this time the smooth, easy highroad no 
longer seemed to comfort Stephan as it had that afternoon. 
That smoothed-out path of civilization took the last strength 
out of his legs. Beyond the bridge, he stumbled more and 
more. He began to walk in zigzags, and suddenly lay down 
on the roadway. 

Haik stood, staring down at him. Only then, he expressed 
despair: “I’m wasting time.” 

Almost an hour beyond the bridge, the road, built over a 
long, high stone embankment, passes the outskirts of the big 
swamp, El Amk. The embankment is called Jisir Murad 
Pasha, and is the real beginning of the wide steppe country 
which stretches on for many hundreds of miles, away past 
Aleppo and the Euphrates, as far as Mesopotamia. But not 
so very far beyond this embankment there lies, on the northern 
side of the road, the most charming strip of hilly country, 
like a last green consolation before rigid death. At the foot 
of this litde cluster of hills is a big Turkoman v illag e, Ain d 

588 



BedUt the "dear faunt” But long before dusters of huts 
thicken to become this village, the road meets single houses, 
white farmsteads of wood or stone that catch the eye. Her^ 
£fty years ago, Abdul Hamid’s government had ordered a 
tribe of Turkoman nomads to setde down. No people make 
better or more hard-working peasants than do such con- 
verted nomads. It was proved by the well-built, well-roofed 
houses of this green and gentle strip of country. 

The first of these farms stood on the road-edge. An hour 
after sunrise its owner came to the door of his house, to sniff 
the wind, test the weather, look in all four quarters of the 
sky, and so spread out his litde praying-mat that, turned to 
Mecca, he might perform the earliest of his five daily devo- 
tions. This pious man had been unaware of the two boys. He 
saw them out of the corner of his eye, squatting together, close 
beside his house, on their rugs, and going through the same 
prescribed praying motions. The sight of such early morning 
fervour in two young men pleased the Turkoman. But, as a 
peaceable Moslem, he had no thought of interrupting his own 
lengthy devouons with profane inquiries. Haik, by allowing 
him many halts, had managed to drag Stephan past the Jisir 
Murad Pasha embankment as far as to the verge of these 
little hills. The sight of peasant homesteads had caused him 
again to warn young Stephan to imitate his every movement 
and, above all, say as little as possible. Stephan could speak 
only a few words of Turkish, in an accent that would have 
betrayed him instantly. As to the Moslem prayer, said Haik, 
it would not be a sin if one kept on whispering fervent “Our 
Fathers.” But this Stephan could not manage. As sblf and 
lifeless as a doll, it was the very utmost he could do to effect 
a wooden copy of Haik’s fervent duckings. When it was 
over, he sank down at once on his praying-mat, to stare up 
at the fresh dawn sky through glassy eyes. 

The Turkoman peasant, a man well past the prime of life^ 

589 



came waddling over towards the suspects. “Well, you rascals! 
Out on the road so early, eh! What are you after? What are 
you looking for?” 

Luckily he himself spoke patois, so that Haik’s Armenian 
accent did not strike Um as particularly strange. And into 
Syria, that great stock-pot of the races, all languages are tossed 
together. So that the Turkoman’s ear was not mistrustful. 

“Sabahlar hajr olsuni” (Good morning. Father!) “We come 
from Antakiya. Lost our parents on the road! They went on 
with their cart, to Hammam. We wanted to run about a bit 
and got lost. The lad here, Hussein, was nearly drowned. In 
the marshes. Now he's ill. Just look at him! Couldn’t you 
give us somewhere we could sleep?” 

With the motions of wisdom, the Turkoman stroked his 
grey beard. Then, taking the boys’ part, he said, very justly: 
“What sort of parents can these be, who go losing their 
children in a swamp, and then go on again? ... Is this lad 
your brother?” 

“No, but a kinsman, from Antakiya. My name is Essad. . . .” 

“Well, this Hussein of yours really docs seem ill. Has he 
been drinking marsh-water?” 

Haik only answered this with a pious proverb. He hung his 
head. “Give us food and somewhere to sleep. Father!” 

None of all this deception was really necessary, since the 
Turkoman’s heart was full of benevolence. For months now, 
convoys of Armenian exiles had come past his house. He had 
often helped Armenian sick, Armenian pregnant women, 
with food and drink, with shoes and clothing, beneficent, 
according to his means, quietly beneficent, without even think- 
ing too much of the reward that he was laying up in the 
hereafter. But these works of mercy had to be done with 
circumspection, on account of the saptiehs. The crime of 
pitying an Armenian merited, by the new laws, the bastinado, 
prison perhaps, or, in very flagrant cases, death. Hundreds of 
good-hearted Turks all over the country, their hearts wrung 

*>90 



by the sight of miserable deportees, had had strange experi> 
ences. The peasant loolced well at the two tramps. Those 
thousands of Armenian eyes which had begged his charity on 
the highroad came into his mind. The results of his compari- 
son were fairly easy to deduce, especially in the case of the one 
who was sick. Yet it was just this so-called Hussein who 
aroused pity in the Turkoman, rather than the so-called Essad 
who, first, was not ill and, second, seemed smart enough for 
anything. 

So the master of the house called sharply, and two women 
at once came forth to him, an old and a young, who, quickly, 
seeing these strangers, let down their veils. They were given 
a gruff order and disappeared again with busy haste. The 
Turkoman led Stephan and Haik into his house. Next its 
smoke-filled parlour, in which it was almost impossible to 
breathe, there was a small, empty room, a kind of storeroom, 
lit only by an opening in the roof. Meanwhile the women 
had come with mats and coverlets. They spread two couches 
on the dry floor. When they saw Stephan’s arms and legs, still 
masked over with a thick crust of slime, they brought in a 
flat tub of hot water and monstrous scrubbing brushes and 
began, with resolute, motherly strength, to rub down his 
arms and legs; in the course of which arduous work the eider 
even hfted her veil, since these were only half-grown children. 
Under the scourings of these peasant women the rigid crust 
not only flaked off Stephan’s body, but off his spirit. Home- 
sickness, long repressed, flooded lus mind like boiling water. 
He bit his lips, his eyes blinked treacherously. Moved by this 
childish grief, the Turkoman women raised their voices in 
strange, melodious consolations — not a word of which he 
could understand. Then the old woman brought them a dish 
of barley-groats in goat’s milk, a flat loaf, and two wooden 
spoons. As the boys ate, a numerous family of Turkomans 
made its appearance, grinning with delight at its own hos- 
pitality, some in the doorway, some in the storeroom itself, 

59 * 



pressing die boys tx> eat their fill. But, in spite of their friendly 
words and the warm food, Stephan could scarcely swallow two 
mouthfuls, so sore and swollen was his throat. Haik finished 
up the whole portion, with the serious thoughtfulness of a 
worker in a heavy industry. 

The inquisitive family departed. Stephan slept at once, but 
the canny Haik first made a few quick plans for tomorrow’s 
route. He hoped that by evening Stephan would be feeling all 
right again, so that they might set out as the moon rose. 
Hammam could be easily reached in the night. If the road 
were clear, so much the better. If it were not, they could keep 
a litde to one side of it, along the foot of the hills. And 
these hills would certainly be the best place m which to sleep 
tomorrow night, when they came past Hammam to the point 
where they would have to take their short-cut, avoiding the 
wide bend of the highway. Notwithstanding these many con- 
tretemps, Haik was, so far, sausfied. The greatest dangers lay 
ahead, but the troublesome part of their route was over. 
Unluckily he had not reckoned with Stephan. Whimpers and 
groans roused him from the sleep of exhaustion to which, in 
this safe room, he had let himself surrender without scruple. 
Stephan, twisted with pain, sat cramped on his mat. Fearful 
colic seemed to cut his body in two, the results of his ad- 
venture in the swamp, El Amk. And now he was clean, Haik 
saw that his whole body was covered with mosquito-bumps. 
Impossible now to get any sleep! The people of the house 
were as kind as ever. The women heated up round stones to 
lay on the sick boy’s belly, and brewed a tea that may have 
been beneficial but which was certainly nauseating, for he 
could not hold it down. 

The peasant had given “Essad” and “Hussein” leave to 
sleep on his roof. They, who had lived weeks in the fresh air, 
could not hold out in this stuffy den, smoky, verminous, 
rancid with the stench of frying fat. Now they were sitting 
on their mats, between pyramids of corn-cobs, piled up bundles 

592 



of reed^ stadcs o£ lu^uorice-roots. Stephao, shivering with 
fever, wrapped in a rug, never took his eyes oS the west. At 
this, the hour before evening, the mountains over along the 
coast looked huge, even taller than they were, ridge upon ridge 
of them, tinted in the richest hues, from deepest sapphire to 
silver, faint as a breath. And they looked incredibly near. Had 
Haik and Stephan really had to walk for the whole night, 
and half a day, to get no farther? That last ridge, which broke 
off sharply over towards the south, must be the Damlayik. 
It stood like a petrified wild beast with tfe hunt in full 
cry after it. Its long back trailed away northwards. Its head 
ducked down, among the nearer heights. But its claws struck 
out wildly behind it, where the wide gap of the Orontes gave 
a suggestion of the sea. Stephan saw only the Damlayik. He 
thought he could distinguish the South Bastion, the knolls, the 
indentation of the ilex gully, the North Saddle, from which 
such ages ago he had taken leave without saying good-bye. 
What had made him do it, exactly? He strove to remember, 
but in vain. The Damlayik seemed to be breathing hard, it 
seemed to hover nearer and nearer, across the Aleppo road, 
above this peasant’s house amid Turkoman hills, straight to 
Stephan Bagradian. 

Haik understood. The kindness of those who are really 
strong, which surrenders itself so easily to the fallen, invaded 
him. “Don’t be afraid. We’ll stay on here till you’re able to 
run again.” 

The feverish Stephan sull gazed in ecstasy at the mountains. 
‘They’re quite near — quite near. ... I mean the hills are.” 

But then he sat up with a jerk, as though it was high time 
to get along. Haik’s menacing words assailed him sharply. 
He repeated them with chattermg teeth: “It isn’t a question 
of you or me; it’s a question of the letter to Jackson. . . .” 

Haik nodded, but not reproachfully. “It’d have been better 
if Hagop had squealed on you , . 

Stephan’s shrunken litde face was not angry now. It tried 

593 



to smile. “That doesn’t matter. ... I won’t ^ake you lose any 
time. ... I shall go back . . . tomorrow.’’ 

Haik suddenly ducked his head, signed urgently to Stephan 
to do the same. Down the near roadway, which had not, all 
that day, been much frequented, came a curious procession, 
with babbling cries, with cries of anguish. It was only a few 
saptiehs, herding on a small Armenian convoy towards Ham- 
mam. Convoy was an absurd misnomer. These were only the 
sweepings of old people and tiny children, raked together 
from some God-forsaken village. The saptiehs, whose business 
it was to have reached Hammam before midnight, cursed and 
pummelled the wretched crew till, like ghosts, they vanished 
round the bend. 

This significant interlude seemed to cause Haik to make up 
his mind. “Yes. You’d far better go back. But how? You can’t 
get through the swamp without me. . . .’’ 

Stephan, to whom the mountain looked so near, had lost 
all sense of possible measurements. “Why not? It’s not so 
far . . .’’ 

But Haik shook his head deasivdy, “No, no, you can’t get 
through the swamp by yourself. You’d better go back by 
way of Antakiya. Over there — ^see? It’ll be far easier. . . . 
But, even that way, they’ll cop you on the road. You don’t 
speak Turkish. You can’t pray like they do, and anyway, as 
you look now, the sight of you would be enough to make 
them wild. . . .’’ 

Stephan sank back dreamily on his mat. “I shall only walk 
at night. . . . Perhaps they won’t rop me, if I do that . . .’’ 

“Oh— you!” Haik growled this in scornful pity. He began to 
think how far back he could go with Stephan without wasting 
more than a day of his great mission. But young Bagradian, 
whose shivering, comfortable fever made everything seem so 
easy of achievement, lay there babbling: “Perhaps Christ 
Saviour’ll help me.” 

And, as things were, this really seemed, to Haik, Stephan’s 

594 



one chance. Apart from txlesdal aid there was not much 
prospect of his safe return to Musa Dagh. But, for the moment, 
it really began to look as though Heaven were on Stephan’s 
s^de. For now the Turkoman peasant came climbing up a 
ladder on to his roof, and began to throw down bundles of 
reeds and liquorice-root. Haik sprang up at once and zealously 
helped him with the work. 

When the roof was clear, the peasant had a surprising in- 
spiration. His eyes twinkled. He said to Stephan: “Where do 
you lads want to make for? Early tomorrow I’m going in to 
market, to Antakiya. Since you two come from Antakiya, I 
don’t mind giving you a lift and taking you home. We’ll be 
there by evening. . . .’’ 

And, proudly, he jerked his thumb towards the big stable 
behind the house. “I don’t drive an ox-cart, you know. I’ve 
got my little pony, and a wagon with real wheels.” 

Haik pushed his imitation turban slighdy askew, to scratch 
his reflective head, which his mother, Shushik, had clipped to 
the bone before he set out. “Father — ^would you mind taking 
my cousin, Hussein, here, to Antakiya with you? That’s 
where his folk live. Mine don’t. They’re in Hammam. Pity 
you aren’t going to Hammam with your horse. I’ll have to 
walk it.” 

The Turkoman studied the cunning one attentively. "So 
your folk live in Hammam, do they? Allah kerim, (^d is 
good, young man' I suppose I know everyone in Hammam. 
What sort of a business do they do there ?” 

Haik answered this with a look of pained indulgence: “But, 
Father, didn’t I tell you, they’ve only been there since yester- 
day? They live in Khan Omar Agha. . . .” 

“Yanasyje! May they be happy there! But Khan Omar 
Agha IS full of military — the ones they’re sending against the 
traitor ermeni on Musa Dagh.” 

“What’s that you’re saying. Father? Military? My folk 
knew nothing about that. W^ perhaps hy now the soldiers’ll 

595 



have left again. After all, Hammam is big and thcyll jnt^aldjr 
be able' to find a shake-down.” 

There was really nothing to say against that. The Turkoman, 
not having managed to unmask Essad, thought hard for a 
while, moved his bps without any sound, and finally left them 
alone again. 

Already, long before midnight, Haik got ready to leave. But, 
before he went, he did all he could for Stephan. He stuffed 
one of his sausages in the rucksack. God knew whether he 
mightn’t lose himself and come to the end of his supplies. 
But Haik himself had no fear of finding as much food as 
he wanted anywhere in the plains of Aleppo. He filled Ste- 
phan’s thermos flask at the stream which ran beside the house 
and brushed the caked mud oft Stephan’s clothes. As he did 
all this, with almost angry care, he kept repeating precise 
instructions as to how Stephan was to behave. 

“He’ll be carrying in these goods of his to market. The 
best thing you can do is not to say anything. You’re ill— see? 
As soon as ever you see the town, jump out, but very, very 
quietly, mind— understand ^ And then you’d better he down 
in a field — find some sort of hole — a ditch. And there you can 
wait till it gets dark. . . . Do you scei*” 

Stephan sat huddled up on his mat. He dreaded the cohe, 
which was returmng. Even more did he dread being left 
alone. The night was not cloudy, like last night, but stainlessly 
clear The vast Milky Way, dense and sparkling, overarched 
the Turkoman’s roof. For an instant Stephan felt Haik’s hand 
in his. That was all. And he could hear his voice, as gruffly 
disdainful as of yore: “Listen — mmd you don’t forget to tear 
up your letter to Jackson!” 

Haik’s foot was already on the ladder, but he turned back 
once again to Stephan. Quickly, without a word, he made the 
sign of the cross on his forehead and on his chest. It was done 
shyly. 

Where there is danger of death, any Armenian is the priest 

596 



tmd &ther of any other. So Ter Haigasun had instructed him, 
when he taught him their religion in Yoghonoluk, at a time 
when not one of them had known that death was already near. 

Just outside the village Ain el Beda the cart-track turned into 
the plain. The Turkoman lashed his little horse mto a trot, 
through the fresh, empty mormng. The laden cart rattled, 
with agonizing jolts, over the deep, stiff ruts. But Stephan 
scarcely noticed these painful joltings. He lay on his rug 
among bundles of reeds in a feverish doze. The fever was 
merciful. It deadened his sense of time and space. It sur- 
rounded him with vague but most pleasant pictures, so that 
he did not bother to think where he would be taken, nor 
what the future might produce. And again this fever, which 
tanned his brown skin to a deeper shade, helped him to play 
his part. Each time the peasant rested his horse, climbed off 
his seat, and came round to have a look at his passenger, 
Stephan would moan, and shut his eyes. So that none of the 
good Turkoman’s many attempts to get into conversation 
really succeeded. All he got were monosyllabic groans with, 
now and again, a whining prayer to continue their journey. 
Haik had taught him what to say: “Ben bir az hasta im” — 
‘Tm not very well.” The reckless Stephan kept repeaung it, 
on every occasion. It got him out of all his religious exerases, 
since Islam dispenses the sick and ailing from the perform- 
ance of religious duties, which make demands on the body. 
When they had crossed the httle river Afrin, by a wooden 
bridge, the peasant thought it time for their midday halt. He 
took his horse out of the shafts and strung on its nosebag. 
Stephan too had to get down, and sit with the old man by 
the roadside, on the dry steppe. This cart-track was scarcely 
frequented. All that morning they bad only met two ox-carts, 
coming in the opposite direction. Most of the peasants in these 
parts used the great highroad, which leads from Ha mmam to 
Antakiya. 


597 



The Turkoman unpacked a flat loaf and goat’s cheese, and 
pushed some over to Stephan. “Go on, boy, cat! Eating kills 
pain.” 

Stephan did not want to wound his host, and did his best 
to swallow some cheese. He chewed and chewed at the first 
mouthful but could not manage to get it down. 

The friendly Turkoman watched with troubled eyes. ‘Ter- 
haps you’ll want more strength than you have, little son!” 

Stephan could not understand the guttural, but knew that 
he must look as though he did. So he bowed, laid his hand on 
his heart, repeated his slogan, hoping for the best: “Ben bir 
az hasta im. . . .” 

The Turkoman kept silence for some time. Then he began 
to work his huge jaws and, gripping his knife, made a mighty 
gesture, as though he were cutung something in two. Stephan 
froze to the marrow. He listened to Armenian words: “Your 
name’s not Hussein! Stop your tales! Do you really want to go 
to Antakiya? I don’t believe it.” 

Stephan was almost unconscious. For all his fever, cold 
sweat stood out on his forehead. 

The Turkoman’s little deep-set eyes had a very sad look in 
them. “Don’t be afraid, whatever your real name is— and trust 
in God! As long as you stay with me, nothing shall happen 
to you.” 

Stephan gathered all his wits about him and tried to stam- 
mer something in lurkish. But the old peasant waved him 
to silence, his hr<nd still brandishing its knife. He needed no 
more words. He was thinking of the droves of wretched 
people, driven day and night past his house by saptiehs. 

“Where dn you come from, boy? From the north? Did you 
get away — weape from the convoy? Was that it?” 

Stephan could only confide. No denials would have been 
any use, now. He whispered, in quick, staccato Armenian, so 
that only his host might hear what he said, and not the 
listening, hostile world: “I come from round here. From Musa 

598 



Elagh. From Yoghonoiuk. I want to get back home. To my 
father and mother.” 

“Home?” The old, horny peasant hand stroked at the grey 
beard, with the gesture of wisdom. “So you’re one of those 
who went up on to the mountain and are fighting our 
soldiers?” The good man’s voice had become a growl. Now, 
Stephan thought, it’ll be all over. He sank on his side, sur- 
rendered to fate, buried his face in the brown, dry grass. The 
Turkoman still held his big knife. He had only to stab. 
When would he do it? But the old man’s growl was all that 
assailed him: “And what’s the name of the other — ^your cousin 
Essad? He was a sly one. He’d not be so easy to catch as 
you, boy.” 

Stephan did not answer. He waited, ready for death. But 
soon he found himself being hfted, by hands as hard as 
stones, but gende. 

“You can’t help your parents’ sin. May God return you to 
them. But it won’t help you, or them either. Now, come on I 
We’ll see what’s best to be done.” 

So Stephan was put back mto the wagon, among bundles 
of reeds. But now the Turkoman seemed to have grown im- 
patient, and thrashed at his litde horse, though the beast had 
covered so many miles, and his rough brown coat glistened 
with sweat. They went at a sharp trot, at times they galloped, 
while the peasant talked oddly to himself — or cursed his horse. 
Yet, no matter how much Stephan was jolted, he felt himself 
more and more safely in God’s hand. He thought, with an 
effort, of Maman. Was she really so ill ? She couldn’t be. But, 
strangely, Maman became Iskuhi. It was hard to get the two 
to separate. Stephan could do nothing to keep them apart, 
though their double image was strangely painful to him. Then 
Haik’s voice began to warn. He mustn’t waste dme! This was 
the daylight! He ought to be sleeping, getting up his strength 
to walk in the night. He obeyed his friend and shut his eyes. 
Fever refused to let him sleep., 

599 



The peasant drew up and told his feverish passenger to gOi 
down. Stephan, with an effort, came to himself and cr^ 
out of the cart. Not far off he saw a bare little hill, surround^ 
with walls of fortifications, and white, domino houses at the 
foot of It. 

The Turkoman thrust at this picture with his whip. “Habib 
en Nedjhar, the atadcl. Antakiyal You must hide yourself 
better now, boy!” 

And in fact, two hundred paces further, the jolting track 
opened out on to the district highroad of Hammam, also re- 
conditioned by Jemal Pasha. The new road was full of un- 
expected traffic. 

The Turkoman pushed apart his bundles of reeds; this left a 
deep cavity in the cart. “You crawl in there, son! I’ll take you 
on through the town, and then a bit further along, past the 
iron bridge. But no further than that! There now, ?et in and 
Ue still!” 

Stephan stretched himself out. The peasant covered him very 
skilfully, so that he got enough air, and was not too burdened 
with the load. There, in this grave, all thoughts were obliter- 
ated. He lay, no more than a lump of indifferent heaviness, 
bereft of courage, ivithout fear. They were trundling now, on 
the broad highway, pleasant and smooth. Noisy voices all 
round them. Stephan in his coffin heard them indifferently. 
They trundled on, jolting, it appeared, over cobblestones. 
Suddenly with a startlmg jerk, they stopped. Men were ap- 
proaching, standing round the cart. Saptiehs, no doubt — ^pohee 
or soldiers. Their voices reached Stephan vaguely, and yet 
loud, as though through a speaking trumpet. 

“Where are you going, peasant?” 

“In to the town. To market. Where else should I go?” 

“Got your papers all right? Hand over! What arc you 
carrying?” 

“Goods for market. Reeds for the binders, and a couple of 
okas of liquorice . . .” 


660 



contraband ? You know lix new law? Grain, maize, 
potatoes, rice, oil, to be given to the authorities.” 

"Fve already delivered my maize in Hammam.” 

Hands were already hastily turning over the top layers. 
Stephan could feel them doing it— bereft of courage, and of 
fear. Now the tired little horse was going on again. They 
drove through a tunnel of noisy voices, at walking pace. Less 
and less light seeped through to Stephan. It was dark when 
they got held up the second time. But the Turkoman did not 
stop. A high, chiding voice pursued them. 

“What new habits are these? Next time you’ll drive by 
daylight. Understand? Will you clodhoppers never realize 
we’re at war?” 

The hoofs were rattling over the wide, square paving-stones 
of the Crusaders’ bridge, called “the iron bridge” for some for- 
gotten reason. Beyond the bridge the Turkoman took the load 
off his feverish passenger. Now Stephan could again lie 
wrapped in his blanket, upon bundles of reeds. 

The old man was delighted. “Cheer up, son! The worst’s 
behind you! Allah means well by you. So I’ll take you on, a 
little way further, as far as Mengulye, where I can stable and 
spend the night with a friend of imne.” 

Though Stephan’s hold on life was now so relaxed, his relief 
at this was still sufficient to plunge him at once into leaden 
sleep. Again the Turkoman urged his poor jade to a trotting 
pace, to arrive as soon as possible with his protege in the vil- 
lage of Mengulye — ^from which, however, a good ten-mile 
walk lay ahead of Stephan to get him back to the place where 
the road branches into the valley of seven villages. But the 
simple mind of this Turkoman peasant was not endowed 
with nearly enough prescience to foresee the intricate ways of 
Armenian fate. Stephan was roused by the glare of acetylene 
lamps, hooded lanterns, bobbing up and down above his face. 
Uniforms were bending over him, moustaches, lambskin kepis. 
The cart was in the midst of a camp of one of the companies 

6oi 



sent by the Wali from the town of Killis to the Kaimakam of 
Antakiya as reinforcement. The soldiers’ tents stood in two 
lines along the road. Only the officers had taken up their quar- 
ters in Mengulye. The Turkoman stood peaceably by his cart. 
He was str^mg at his httle horse, perhaps to cover his own 
fears. 

One of the onbashis cross-questioned: “Where are you go- 
ing? Who’s the boy here? Is he your son?’’ 

The peasant shook his head reflectively. “No! No! He’s no 
son of mine." 

He tried to gain time to form a good thought. The onbashi 
bellowed at him not to stand there, saying nothing! 

Luckily, having attended its various markets, the old man 
knew the names of most of the villages in the district. So now 
he sighed, rolling his head about: “We’re going to Sens, to 
Seris, over there at the foot of the mountain . . .’’ 

He sang it like an innocent litany. The onbashi turned a 
sharp beam on Stephan. 

The Turkoman’s voice began to whine: *Tcs, you take a 
look at the child. I’ve got to get him back to Sens, to his own 
folk.” 

Meanwhile corporals and privates had begun to swarm 
around the cart. But the old man seemed suddenly full of 
excitement. “Oh, don’t go too near! Don’t go too near! Be 
careful!” 

And indeed this warning startled the onbashi. He stared at 
the peasant, whose Anger pomted at Stephan’s face. 

“Can’t you sec for yourself the child’s got a fever on him, 
and doesn’t know where he is? Keep off, you over there, if you 
don’t want the sickness to get you, too. The hekim has sent 
the lad away from Antakiya. , . .” And now this wwthy 
Turkoman appalled even the onbashi with his use of the 
words “spotted typhus.” In these days, in Syria, not even the 
words “plague” and “cholera” had such power-evoking terror 
as “spotted typhus.” TKe soldiers darted off at once, and even 

6o2 



the grim, resolute oabashi stepped back. But now this excellent 
man from Ain el Beda pulled out his papers, demanding 
scrutiny, waving them close under the very nose of this 
sergeant, who, with a curse, renounced his office. 

In ten seconds the road was clear again in front of them. 
The Turkoman, beside himself with pride and satisfaction at 
his own success, left his exhausted pony to its devices and 
walked, chuckling, beside Stephan. “You see, my boy, how 
well Allah means by you. Didn’t he mean well by sending you 
to me? Be thankfid you found me. Be thankfidl For now I 
shall have to go half an hour further with you, to sleep some* 
where else.” 

Stephan’s last terror had so paralysed him that he scarcely 
heard what his friend was saying. And when later the Turko- 
man waked him, he could not stir. The old man took him up 
in his arms, like a child, and set him down on the road which 
leads along the bed of the Orontes, into Sucdia. 

"There’s not a soul about here, boy. If you hurry, you can 
be back in the mountain before it’s light. Allah does more 
for you than he docs for most of us,” 

The peasant gave Stephan some more of his cheese, a fiat 
loaf, and his water-flask, which he had had refilled in Antakiya. 
Then he seemed also to be giving him counsel and advice, 
some heartening words, as he bade God-speed. It ended with 
the wish of peace, "Sclam alck.” But Stephan could hear none 
of all this, since a loud roaring was in his cars, and his head 
was swimming. He could only see how the light turban and 
whitish beard moved rhythmically, and how both tijrban and 
beard permeated the darkness, with ever more beneficent light 
How Stephan Bagradian longed for that mild sheen, the source 
of all hght and consolation, as the stumbling clatter of Vinofs 
became remote. The vanishing cart hung out no lantern. 'The 
moon had not yet risen from over the steep gullies of the 
Amanus. 



Tb& Haigasdn had sent down a menage— probably bb fits^ 
since he had held jurisdiction over these parishes*-to the 
graveyard dvi^cllers in all the villages. Nunik and her sisters 
were to set out through the country round Musa Dag^ after 
news of the lost Stephan fiagradian. Should they succeed in 
getting any important information, or even, perhaps, bringing 
back the fugitive, a great reward was to be theirs. They would 
be given their own camp beside the Town Enclosure. It was a 
stioke of genius in Ter Haigasun to have ofFered such a high 
reward Gabriel Bagradian was the most important man on 
the Damlayik. The whole future would depend on the state 
of mind and body of the leader. All that could be done must 
be attempted to prevent Gabriel’s inward strength— Juliette 
had delivered the first blow against it — ^from sustaining irrep- 
arable damage from Stephan’s fate. This reward seemed im- 
mense to these dregs of the villages. And yet Nunik had 
scarcely a hope that they would gain it. Since the last great 
Armenian victory, things had been getting cruelly difficult 
for the people left behind in the valley. The mudir had 
issued an order, posted up in all the villages, by which it was 
the duty of every Mussulman to arrest any Armenian he en- 
countered— no matter who. Blmd, sick, mad, crippled, an old 
man or a child, it was all the same. This significant order was 
designed to render impossible all espionage on behalf of the 
mountain camp. It had not been pasted up two days on the 
walls of the church, and already the graveyard population, 
which originally, m the seven villages, might have been 
reckoned at close on seventy people, had shrunk to forty. 
Those who had survived were ther^ore forced, if they wanted 
to go on living a litde longer, to find some really close and 
^cctive hiding-place. And, Christ be praised, they had found 
it! Only the bravest and strongest, like Numk, the eternally 
wandering, ventured forth between midnight and daybreak, 
in search of food— at the risk of destruction — to poach a lam^i 
or a she-goat. Stephan’s way home led past this sanctuary. 

604 



A&ow a mik outnde the milage Ain Yerab, the ruins of 
ancient Antioch cluster together into what becomes a veritable 
town. This town is surmounted by the pilasters and vast 
broken arches of a Roman viaduct. The road, which, so far, 
has been an easy one, here narrows down to a vague track, 
which leads on, along the bed of the river, deeply channelled 
into the rocks, through the stony waste, which once was a 
human habitation. At places the way is strewn with square- 
hewn stones, fragments of columns, fallen capitals, which 
almost block it. Stephan, dazed with fever as he was, went 
stumbling on, tripping up again and again on blocks of stone, 
getting himself entangled in creepers, skinning his knees, 
falhng flat, dragging himself up, stumbling forwards. From 
his right, concealed in the farthest ruins, firelight kept flicker- 
ing faindy from time to time. Had Stephan been Haik, he 
would have sensed, even without the firelight, from miles off, 
the presence of these miserable beggars, whose very misery 
made them his allies. His sure feet would have carried him 
straight to them. But where might Haik be at this hour? 
Thuty paces off the side of the path he followed there was 
safety waiting for Stephan, with even a lighted bonfire to help 
him look for it. Nunik, Wartuk, Manushak, would have been 
able to hide Stephan safely, nursed him for a day and a 
night, and then, by the sure ways of their experience, brought 
him back to the Damlayik, to claim the great reward. But this 
town-boy was afraid of fire. He felt himself being pursued 
as he rushed on up the steepemng road. He came to the top, 
and drank a swig of flat, lukewarm water out of his flask. 
Musa Dagh was before him. Here in the moonlight the thick, 
black smoke-swaths which eddied up off the centre of the 
mountain could plainly be seen. The flames seemed to have 
died down, since now there was no longer a wind to fan them , 
Now and again a burning coal would glow and vanish. 

Even then fate gave young Bagradian one more chance. 
Nunik had sensed something. Leaving her little fire^ she had 

605 



caught a ^mpse of a scurrying shape, which could not have 
been the shadow of a man. There were a few waifs and strays 
sunong the beggar-folk. One of those children, a little boy of 
not more than eight, was sent out to find who the shadow 
was. But when Stephan heard a patter and scurry behind him, 
he did not turn round, but went racing onwards, like a mad 
horse. He used every ounce of his strength in his desperate 
run. Noises kept hammering m his ears. Was his father calling 
him? Was it Haik hissing: “Quick march”? He ran, not as 
though a child were after him, but the whole infantry company 
whose dutches he had escaped that mght. Here these aqueduct 
ruins ceased abruptly, the road broadened out. The first dark 
ridges towered over the road. Stephan ran for dear life. A 
malicious panic drove him down the first side valley, which 
he mistook for his own, of the seven villages. His flight was 
giving him such wings that it felt as though he were actually 
hovering high over the stone-strewn heath as he ran. Stephan 
turned into the valley, without knowing that he was yelling 
with all his might. But he did not get far. He tripped over 
the first real obstade, a tree-trunk flung across his way; and 
then lay still. 

When he came to himself, the day was upon him in misty 
twilight. Stephan firmly believed that it was still the day 
before yesterday, the very same hour at which he had come 
out of the swamp El Amk— he and Haik— into pleasant hill- 
country, to the Turkoman’s house. He had forgotten all that 
had happened since, or could only remember it as a dream. 
His diseased sense of time was reinforced by the fact that 
there was a house in front of him, though to be sure not a 
white limestone house, but a wrinkled clay hut, an ugly one 
at tha^ without any windows. But out of this house, too, there 
came a man, in a turban, with a grey beard, perhaps not the 
Turkoman guardian angel, but at least an old man. And lol 
—this old man too snuffled the wmd, looked up at the sky, 

606 



tunied to the four quarters of the hemisphere, spread out a 
little carpe't, squatted, and began to pray, with many bob- 
bings and duckings. 

like a flash Hsdk’s warning came back to Stephan. Imitate 
everything! And so, in the place where he had faUen, he b^n 
to copy. He could not manage more than a few feeble sway- 
ings and moans. But this man also saw him at once. 

Yet^ not so pious, it seemed, as the Turkoman peasant, he 
stopped in the middle of his prayer, stood up, and came across 
to Stephan. “Who are you? Where do you come from? What 
do you want?” 

Stephan made himself kneel up; he bowed and put his hand 
to his heart. “Ben bit az hasta im, Effendi.” 

Having said it pat, he made a sign that he was thirsty. At 
first the greybeard seemed to hesitate. Then he went to the 
well, dipped a pitcher, and brought it back. Stephan drank 
avidly, though the water seemed to cut him as he was drink- 
ing It. Meanwhile someone ebe had come out of the house; 
not, as Stephan fully expected, helpful women, but another, 
scowling, man with a black beard, who repeated the grey- 
beard’s questions, word for word: “Who are you? Where do 
you come from? What do you want?” 

The lost Stephan made two vague motions in different 
directions. They might mean either Suedia or Antakiya. 

The scowling blackbcard became angry. “Can’t you speak? 
Are you dumb?” 

Stephan smiled with big, vague eyes at him, as helpless as a 
child of three. He was still on his knees before them. The 
greybeard walked round him twice, like a craftsman sizing up 
a finished job. He took Stephan under the chin and twbted 
his head towards the hght. It was a test. The blackbcard also 
seemed very interested. They went a few steps aside and began 
to talk in quarrelsome voices, but still keeping an eye on 
Stephan. When they had finished, their faces had the solemn 
look of men charged with a difficult public duty. 

607 



The bladcbeard began the intcrrogationt “Young iBan, sxe 
you circumcised or uncircumcised?” 

Stephan did not understand. Only then did his confiding 
Ktnilr become a look of anxious questioning. His silence roused 
the Moslems to wrath. Hard, chiding words beat down like 
hailstones. Stephan, for all their shouts and flourishes, knew 
less and less what they were after. The blackbeard’s patience 
gave out. He grasped the kneeling Stephan under the arm- 
pits and jerked him up. It was the greybeard who -undid his 
clothes and investigated. Now their worst suspicions were 
confirmed. This sly Armenian, trying to pretend he was deaf 
and dumb, was an insolent spy, sent out by the camp on 
Musa Dagh. No time to lose! They shoved the tottering 
Stephan on before them, down the narrow valley-path from 
Ain Yerab, to the big highroad. They then held up the first 
ox-cart come from the neighbourhood of Antakiya, in the 
Suedia direction. The driver had at once to change his direc- 
tion, in the name of commonweal and public service. The 
bailiffs lifted their prisoner into the cart. Next him squatted 
the blackbeard; the greybeard walked excitedly with the 
owner, explaining this danger, now averted. 

Stephan’s fate was sealed. But now some merciful power 
had made him cease to know where he was. His head sank 
down across the knees of the blackbeard, his mortal enemy. 
And behold I that gnm-faced avenger did not thrust away 
his victim. He sat as rigid as though he were doing his best to 
ease the young man. That hectic face in his lap, with its open 
eyes, staring up into his, and yet not seeing them, this feverish 
breath, those red, dry lips, this whole surrendered c hildi shness, 
leaning against him, roused in the blackbeard’s narrow mind 
the wildest bitterness. That was what the world was like. 
You had to dash your fist in its face! 

But Stephan had even forgotten Musa Dagh. He had even 
forgotten his captured howitzers; he had forgotten those five 
sleepy peasants whom he, the crack shot, had picked out so 

608 



aeady. Haik was scarcxiy evea a name. I^uhi was as faint 
as a breath. Stephen was wearing his own European dothes 
again, his Norfolk jacket and lac^ shoes. They felt very safe 
and comfortable, his feet marvellously clean. He was walkmg 
with Maman down splendid boulevards, and then along the 
lakeside at Montreux. He and Maman were living in the 
Palace Hotel. He sat with her before white tablecloths, played 
in gravel beds, sat in white-washed classrooms with other, all 
equally well looked after, boys. He was sometimes smaller, 
and sometimes bigger, but always he was safe and at peace. 
Maman carried her red sunshade. It cast such a vivid red 
shadow that at times her face was hard to recognize. 

Ail this was perhaps uneventful, but so quietly pleasant 
that Stephan did not notice the saptieh guardhouse on the edge 
of Wakef. One of its two gendarmes reinforced the blackbeard 
in the cart and held Stephan’s ankles. And in Wakef itself 
they were joined by a whole detachment of saptiehs. The 
more the commotion, the further they came into the valley. 
This escort drew a small crowd after it, men, women, chil- 
dren. 

It reached the church square in Yoghonoluk long before 
midday. And' by then there were about a thousand people, in- 
cluding many old soldiers and recruits, at present garrisoned in 
the villages. Quickly the red-haired mudir was sent for, out of 
Villa Bagradian. The saptiehs pushed Stephan out of the cart. 
The mudir ordered him to strip; there might be some writing, 
hidden on his naked body. Stephan did it so quietly and in- 
differently that the crowd mistook his peace for sullenness; 
it enraged the onlookers. 

Even before he was quite naked, someone had punched the 
back of his head. But this blow was merciful. It left Stephan 
not quite stunned, but well back in that delightful world in 
which he had been beginning to feel so at home, and from 
which he might otherwise have emerged again. 

Meanwhile the saptiehs had emptied his rucksack. In it 

609 



they found Stephan’s kodak, and his copy of the letter to 
Jackson. 

The mudir held Stephan’s Christmas present up to the 
crowd, most of whom had never seen a camera. “This is an 
instrument by which you can always tell a spy.” 

He deciphered, and read out to the people, with loud bursts 
of tri ump h in his voice, that highly treacherous letter to the 
consul. When he had done, the whole square bellowed with 
hate. 

The mudir came close up to Stephan. His beautifully mani> 
cured hand chucked him under the chin, as if to encourage. 
“Now, my boy, tell us your name.” 

Stephan smiled and said nothing. The sea of reality was re- 
mote. He could just hear its waves break in the distance. 

But the mudir remembered the photograph of a boy which 
he had seen in the selamhk of the villa. He turned back solemly 
to the crowd. “If he won’t tell you, I will. This is the son 
of Bagradian.” 

The first knife was thrust into Stephan’s back. But he could 
not feel it. Because he and Maman were just on their way to 
fetch Dad, who was due in Switzerland from Pans. Maman 
still had her red sunshade. Dad was coming out of a very 
high door, all by himself. He was dressed in a snow-white 
suit, without any hat. Maman beckoned to him. But, when he 
saw his small son waiting, Gabriel opened his arms, in a move- 
ment of unfathomable gentleness. And since Stephan was 
really such a litde boy. Dad could lift him close to his radiant 
face, and then high above his head-higher and higher. 

Nunik found his body that night. It was a very mangled but 
not disfigured corpse. Saptiehs had flung it naked into the 
churchyard. Numk came only just in time to get it away from 
the wild dogs. She sent off one of her waifs to their camp in 
the ruins, to call all the other beggar-folk. Today they must 
put off fear, since a mighty thing had come to pass. The line 

6io 



of Avetis Bagradian, the foimder, was now for ever ex* 
dnguished. This was the hour at which to do Ter Haigasun’s 
bidding, and carry Bagradiao’s son back to the mountain. 
The reward could not be withheld. A life of safety was in 
prospect. 

The shy beggar-&ilk came to the graveyard in little groupa 
The corpse-wafers set to work immediately. They cleaned 
the blood and dirt off the scarred, beautiful body of the boy. 
And the generous Nunik did even more for the last Bagradian. 
Out of her incredible sack she drew a white shift, in which 
to wrap him. As she was doing this ultimate service a blind 
beggar raised his sing-song voice: 

“The lamb’s blood flowed towards their house.” 

When it was done, Nunik, Wartuk, Manushak, and the 
other keening-women among the beggar-folk took up their 
heavy sacks. They walked, bent double, under the load. In 
the second hour of this new day the procession, noiseless, 
almost invisible, in spite of a crescent moon, crept up the 
Damlayik, to reach the Town Enclosure by secret paths, 
unscathed by the mountain conflagration. Numk, with her 
long staff, led them. When they were safe in the woods, they 
lit two torches to carry one on either side of the bier, so that 
the corpse might not return unlit, unhonoured. 


6n 



3 


Pain 

Gabriel was again spending bis nights in his usual place in 
the north trenches. Ter Haigasun had become alarmed at the 
slackness he noticed among the men, the obvious relaxation o£ 
their discipline. It was at his most urgent request that Gabriel, 
even on the night after Stephan’s disappearance from the 
Damlayik, consented to resume his command. To do so was 
a clearer proof of his own steadiness and disciphne than all 
three batUes. For, in these days, his hands kept trembling, 
he could not swallow a bite, nor sleep a wink. Uncertainty 
as to Stephan’s fate was not his worst, most terrible suffering. 
The real anguish lay in its being impossible to do anything to 
find him, rescue him. Could he perhaps recondition his mobile 
guard and carry out a sortie with them, even as far as the 
streets of Aleppo ? Perhaps such a night-expedition, spreadmg 
its terrors all through the countryside, might end by ovcrtakmg 
Stephan and Haik. Naturally he checked this romantic 
fantasy. What right had he to risk the lives of a hundred 
people in a wild attempt to save his son.? Stephan, after all, 
had done on his own impulse what Haik did as the mes- 
senger of the people. There was no general reason whatsoever 
for moving heaven and earth to bring him back. 

So Gabriel, as though gasping for air, flung himself back 
into his work. Chaush Nurhan was given orders to put the 
decads through daily fighting-manoeuvres. It was hkp the very 
first days. No one, not even in the rest hours, was to leave 
his post. Leave for the Town Lnclosure was granted only in 

6i3 



fflrgem cases. Hard tasks wen imposed on die reserve. Against 
die next great Turkish attack the trenches were not only to 
be improved, but, to trick the enemy, partly shifted, and 
what was left of the old ones rendered impregnable by high 
stone parapets. No one dared oppose Bagradian’s desperate 
activity. But his resdess demands did not, strangely enough, 
make people irritable or arouse their hate. They rather in- 
vigorated and electrified, filling the camp with fresh desire 
to do batde. Life, after a short relaxation, had again its object 
and its content. 

Gabriel felt no personal hosdbty, merely a growing sense of 
isolation. It is true that, even before, there had never been 
any real cordiality, either between him and the leaders, or be- 
tween him and the rank-and-file. Friendship was out of the 
question. They simply obeyed him, as their leader. They re- 
spected him. They were even grateful. But he and the people 
of Musa Dagh were two different sorts of human being. 

Now, however, they actually shunned him; even Aram 
Tomasian, who until now had seized on every chance of a 
talk. He noticed how, right and left of his sleeping-place, in 
the north trench, his neighbours moved their rugs farther 
away. Their superfiaal reason for doing it was that Gabriel, 
who every day spent an hour or more by Juliette’s bed, might 
be infectious. But far more complex feehngs lay behind. 
Gabriel Bagradian was a man struck by misfortune, a man for 
whom, they could feel instinctively, even worse misfortune 
lay in store. It is a human instina to shun the unlucky. 

The camp epidemic had still not spread. This was mostly 
due to the weather, and to a certain small extent to Bedros 
Hekim. Out of a hundred and three cases of fever, only 
twenty-four had so far died. If any member of the camp felt 
in the least feverish or unwell, he must pack up his rugs and 
pillows at once and go straight along to the isolation-wood, 
the fever hospital of the Damlayik. This shady wood was 
pleasant enough. The patients did not mind having to be there. 

613 



But a Aower would certainly have altered its conditions much 
£or the worse. 

Twice a day, riding on his donkey, Bedros Altoum came to 
see Juliette. He was puzzled at the fact that, in her case, Ae 
fever seemed not to be taking its normal course. The crisis 
seemed to take a long time coming. After the first attack 
her temperature had fallen slightly, but without the patient 
regaining consciousness. And juhette, unhke the other patients, 
was nafher quite unconscious, nor delirious; she was in a 
kind of deep, leaden sleep. Yet, in this sleep, without waking 
out of it, she could turn her head, open her mouth, and swal- 
low the miik which Iskuhi gave her. Sometimes she stammered 
a few words from another hfe. 

In the first days Iskuhi scarcely left her side. She had had 
her bed moved into Juliette’s tent. She saw nothing more of 
Hovsannah and the baby. It had become impossible. 

Juliette’s maids were nowhere to be found. They were 
afraid of infection and much dishkcd having to touch either 
the patient or her belongings. What, after all, had they to do 
with this foreigner, who was in such bad odour all round? 
So that, for the present, the whole burden lay on Iskuhi. 

But when the doctor’s wife came to relieve her, she had 
literally to force her out of the tent for a few hours’ rest, and 
even then Iskuhi refused to sleep. She sat on the ground not 
far off and never stirred. If she heard any voice or caught any 
footfall, she started in panic and tried to hide herself. The 
thought of meeting her brother or father appalled her. Her 
best hour was the last before sunrise, when she sat, as now 
she was sitting, in front of the tent, to wait for Gabriel. He 
usually came to her then, at this, the stillest of all hours, since 
as a rule a whole night in the trenches proved more than he 
could manage to endure. Gabriel, followed by Iskuhi, went 
in, to Juliette’s bedside. The oil lamp on the litde dressing- 
table cast its light full on to the patient’s face. Altouni had 
asked that Juliette might never be left unwatched. She might 

(su^ 



come to hersd^ or her heart might>begin to fail. Gabrid bent 
over his wife and forced back her eyelids. He might have 
been trying to force her spirit back into the light. Juliette 
became rather restless; she moved a litde and breathed heavily, 
but she did not wake. Iskuhi’s voice began relating the day’s 
incidents. Inside the tent their talk was always matter of fact. 
But, even outside it, their love was not safe. Recently, as they 
walked at about this hour in Three-Tent Square, Iskuhi had 
caught sight of Hovsannah’s tent curtain moving, and she felt 
Hovsannah’s eyes watching them. So that now they crept out 
of the tent on tiptoe and went to the “garden” — that bank 
dotted about with myrtle bushes where Juliette once had re- 
ceived admirers. Tonight at least they were concealed. Yet, 
for all the utter loneliness of the place, they spoke in a half- 
whisper and never touched. 

“You know, Iskuhi, I thought at first I might go mad. But 
the moment I felt you near me, the horror passed. I’m free of 
It now. Quiet! It’s beautiful here. We haven’t much longer.” 

He leaned far back like a man in pain who at last has 
managed to find a painless attitude, and wants to keep it. 
“I used to love Juliette, and perhaps I do still. At least as a 
memory. But this between you and me, what is it, Iskuhi? 
I was fated to find you now, at the end of my life, just as I 
was fated to come here — not by chance, but . . . well, how 
shall I put it? All my life I’d only sought for what was foreign 
to me. I loved the' exotic. It enticed me, but it never made me 
happy. And I attracted it, too, but I couldn’t make it happy 
either. One lives with a woman, Iskuhi, and then meets you, 
the only sister one can ever have in the world, and it’s too 
late.” 

Iskuhi looked away past him, at bushe^ faintly stirred by 
the night wind. “But suppose we’d met somewhere out in the 
world — ^would you still have noticed I was your sister?” 

“God only knows. Perhaps not.” 

She showed no trace of disappointment. “And I could see at 

615 



oQoe wliat you are to me, that time in the church, when we 
came from Zeitun . . 

“lliat time? I never used to believe one could turn into 
another person. I used to think one goes on adding to oneself 
developing. The truth’s just the other way. One mdts in a fire. 
What’s happening now to you and me, and our whole people, 
is a smelting process. That’s a stupid way of putting it. But 
I can feel how molten I am. Every bit of dross, every un- 
necessary part of me, has gone. Soon I shall only be a piece 
of metal, I feel. And that’s the real reason why Stephan’s 
done for. . . .” 

Iskuhi caught his hand. “Why are you saying that? Why 
should Stephan be done for? He’s a strong boy. And Haik’s 
certain to get to Aleppo. Why not he?” 

“He won’t get to Aleppo. . . . Just think what’s happened. 
And he has all that on him.” 

“You oughtn’t to say things like that, Gabriel. You’ll be 
doing him harm, with them. I have every hope for Stephan.” 

Suddenly Iskuhi turned her head to watch the sick-tent. 
Gabriel thought, without knowing why: She wants juhette 
to be dead, she must want it. 

Iskuhi had jumped to her feet. “Can’t you hear something? 
I think Juliette’s calling.” 

He had heard nothing, but followed Iskuhi. She rushed to 
the tent. Juliette was writhing on the bed, hkc a bound woman, 
trying to free herself. She was neither awake nor quite un- 
conscious. Whitish scurf covered her bitten lips. From her 
glowing cheeks it was obvious that fever, in the last few 
minutes, had touched the hmit of the possible. She swtnffl 
to recognize Gabriel. Her hand strayed and caught his 
jacket. 

He scarcely understood her muttering question: “Is it true? 
— ^Is all this true?” 

Between her question and his reply came a little pause full 
of icy stillness. But then, bending down over her, he stressed 

6i6 



« 9 ch syllable, like a hypnotist: “No^ Juliette^ that’s all not true' 
. . . it’s not tru^” 

A shuddering sigh: “Thank God. . . . It’s not true.” 

Her body relaxed. She drew up her knees, as though to 
creep back happily, innocendy, into her womb of fever. 
Gabriel felt her pulse. A wild, yet scarcely perceptible litde 
beat. It seemed doubtful if she’d get through next day. Quick 
— that stimulant from the medicine chest. Iskuhi thrust the 
spoon with the strophanthus mixture between Juliette’s teeth. 

Juliette came to herself, tried to sit up, and moaned: “And — 
Stephan’s milk too . . . don’t forget 1” 

For Pastor Aram there began an annoying day. He had 
buckled a lantern on to his belt and gone out before it was 
bght to climb down the rocks to the sea and test the first 
result of his fishery. The raft was ready, and they had ven- 
tured out on this windless night, with draw-nets and litde 
lanterns, to fish, in the ordinary way, oil the coast. The idea 
of It obsessed Tomasian. It seemed not only to hold the possi- 
bility of a necessary change of diet and abundant supple- 
mentary supplies. It was more than that even. It was their 
only real salvation from the ever-increasing threat of famine. 
Surely, if they worked hard enough, it ought to be possible 
to make the sea yield up its daily ration of two to three hun- 
dred okas of fish. No matter how strictly they might econo- 
mize, in six weeks the last sheep would have been killed — 
and that by the most optimistic reckoning. But if he, Aram 
Tomasian, could only get his fishery to flourish, new courage, 
new endurance, new strength to resist, would come from the 
sea. The very thought of the sea, as the mexhaustible source 
of all hfe, would work a miracle. 

And so, in the greenish light of early morning, the young 
pastor climbed down to the beach, along a path rebuilt by order 
of the Council. Yet, as he climbed, he was thinking neither of 
sheep nor milk, nor even of his own fishery. His little son was 

617 



just sixteen days old — ^his eyes as big as the eyes of dl Arme- 
nians. But they saw nothing. And stdl this baby had not cried. 
The only sound it ever managed to bring out was a toneless 
whisper. Every day the truth seemed more cruelly plain. His 
son was born blind and deaf. 

Yet the fiery birthmark on his body was spreading— that 
mysterious sign which Musa Dagh seemed herself, with 
some invisible seal, to have burned into the flesh of the pastor’s 
child. Since no ordinary medical aid seemed of use, Hovsannah 
had nearly got to the point of consulting Nunik, if she could 
find her. But now, since the Turks had invaded the valley, 
the old women of birth and death were seen no more on the 
Damlayik. 

The child had suffered much in Hovsannah’s womb, on the 
way from Zeitun to Yoghonoluk. That was the logical explana- 
tion. It did not satisfy Hovsannah. She felt herself punished by 
God. It was not for nothing that Hovsannah had been reared a 
Protestant. A child should be God’s blessing. This child was 
God’s punishment. God sends His punishment for sin. And 
Hovsannah was unaware of having committed any. Yet, 
since sin undoubtedly there was, it must be in others, and 
clearly in those who were most about her. Aram had certainly 
not sinned. Hovsannah was an avidly faithful wife, whose 
marriage, as he knew, was spotless. Where, then, was this sin, 
this taint, which branded her sinless child? There was always, 
first and foremost, that prime mover of God’s wrath, Juliette 
Bagradian. In her, the adulteress, the fashion-maniac, the god- 
less woman, the foreigner, Hovsannah perceived the epitome 
of all sinfulness, whose taint infects like a disease. Yet they 
lived shamelessly in proximity to her, in her very tent, slept 
in her bed, ate off her plates. . . . And Hovsannah’s thoughts 
did not end there! Slowly the truth had forced its way into 
her heart and, once perceived, she embraced it greedily: 
Iskuhil It was not to be doubted! Hovsannah knew how it 
stood with her young sister-in-law. She too was an adulteress 

618 



in her heart, without control, without belief desperately re- 
solved to be a siiuer. Had she not always, even in Zatun, 
been stubborn, preoccupied with herself, crazy for pleasure- 
even in the days when Aram demanded of his wife the bitter 
sacrifice of sharing her house with such a woman. But Aram 
had always refused to look at the truth; it had always been a 
sheer impossibility to say one frank word about Iskuhi, his 
dear litde sister. In the moment when Hovsannah Tomasian 
had run weeping from the christening of her child, she had 
seen the hidden connexion of all these things, in an indistinct 
and poignant vision, without really knowing anything. But 
now she knew all! She knew that her child was accursed of 
God. She no longer wept. With clenched fists she measured 
out the length of her tent— five paces — up and down, like a 
madwoman in her cell. And last night she had refused to go 
on keeping silence and demanded of Aram that he take her 
to Father Tomasian’s hut. In the stench of sin surrounding 
the Bagradians, her child would never be free of God’s pun- 
ishment. 

The pastor, who suffered much at his wife’s dementia, gaped 
at her, unable to understand. "What’s it to do with us and our 
child that Juhette Bagradian is a sinner?” 

Hovsannah had plucked the child away from her breast 
She had felt her rising anger poison the milk in her. “So even 
you want to be blind. Pastor?” 

He had done his best to clarify her senseless rage. Then at 
last he had lost his temper with W and reproved her sharply. 
Iskuhi was risking her Lfe, he had said, for the sake of a 
stranger. And all the thanks she got for her Christian good- 
ness and pure charity was to be slandered so vulgarly— and by 
her — by her own sister-in-lawl He, Aram, understood Hovsan- 
nah’s present condition; he was willing to forget what she had 
just said, and forgive her for saying it. 

But Hovsannah laughed scorni^ly. “You can convince 
yourself Pastor, of the way in which your tender-hearted 

619 



Iskuhi nurses the sick. Just stick your head inside the tent; one 
ni^t. You’ll find them together. Sometimes they go out shame- 
lessly for walks in the middle of the night . . .” 

Hovsannah’s laugh, and her words, kept sounding in the 
pastor’s ears aU the way down the cliffs to his fishery. He could 
think of nothing else. The cold truth became more apparent 
with every step. God had pumshed him in this child for his 
own great sin in Marash, his betrayal of the orphan children. 
He himself was the guilty one^ and not Iskuhi. Down on the 
shore, among the rocks, Aram, to make bad worse, learned 
that his great idea had so far only produced the most meagre 
results. In spite of the calm sea, the raft had come to bits as 
they put out, and three young fishermen had almost been 
drowned. In view of such dangers the results were extremely 
unsatisfactory: two small baskets of tiny silver sprats and 
jellyfish. The catch would ]ust have been enough for one big 
soup-tureen. Tomasian mocked them savagely, and gave fresh 
orders. The salting-ground had been more successful than the 
fishery. A good haul of salt could be carried up to the Town 
Enclosure. 

Aram scarcely remained there fifteen minutes. His uneasy 
heart drove him back. He had no clear idea what he could do 
to save Iskuhi. Had he not, even in her childhood, always re- 
spected and been reserved with her? And besides — it was the 
only way with Iskuhi Her personality, in spite of all her quiet, 
friendly submissions, had something as hard and unyielding as 
a crystal in it. It would not be encroached on. 

In Zeitun and on Musa Dagh, the pastor had given proof 
enough of his courage. But now, as he reached the s^ubs 
which fenced off these rocks, he was undecided and faint of 
heart. Perhaps the straightest solution would be to go straight 
to Bagradian and have it out with him. But — no! How could 
he ever dare to bring out such an evil suspicion to a man of 
Bagradian’s rank, who compelled respect. A man whom fate 
had just struck so cruelly, driven as he was to desperation for 

620 



dbe life of lik only son! Tomasian saw no way out of it. ife 
had almost made up his mind m leave it alone, at least for 
the present. Yet, before turning into the Town Enclosure to 
speak to his father, he resolved to take a last, quick look at 
Hovsannah. He encountered a very different person. Iskuhi 
sat before Juliette’s tent, gazing out with unseeing eyes in the 
direction in which Gabriel had )u$t disappeared. She did not 
notice her brother till he was close to her. 

Aram sat down, faang her, on the ground and strove un- 
comfortably to find words: “It’s a long time since we’ve had 
i talk with each other, Iskuhi.” 

This she dismissed with a gesture, as though no human 
memory could sudice to measure the gulf between past and 
present. 

Aram felt his way slowly: “Hovsannah misses you very 
much. She’s always been so used to having you help her. . . . 
And now there’s this poor little child, and so much work to 
do.” 

Iskuhi interrupted impatiently: “But surely, Aram, you 
tnust know that ]ust because of the child this is about the last 
time I ought to go in to see Hovsannah . . .” 

“I know you’ve undertaken to nurse here. That’s very good 
of you. . . . But perhaps now, your own family needs you 
even more.” 

Iskuhi seemed very surprised. “The hanum in there hasn’t 
got anyone. . . . But Hovsannah’s up out of bed and has all 
the people she wants to look after her.” 

Pastor Aram swallowed hard several times, as though he 
had a pain in his throat. “You know me, Iskuhi, how I hate 
beating about the bush. Will you be perfectly frank with me? 
Placed as we are, anything else would be ridiculous . . .” 

She let her eyes rest with vague hostihty on her brother. “I 
am being quite frank with you.” 

Now he began to get uncomfortable and strove to build a 
bridge above her innocence. If it were only a question of a 

621 



companion, a friend, someone with whom she sympathized— 
of anything not desperately serious. He felt hotly anxious that 
she should tell him so, sternly reprove, and inform him sharply 
that her sister-in-law’s suspiaons were all a lie. 

"Hovsannah’s very worried about you, Iskuhi. She keeps 
saying she’s been noncing certain things. We quarrelled half 
the night about it. That’s why I ask you, so please forgive me. 
Is there anything between you and Gabriel Bagradian?” 

Iskuhi did not blush, nor did she display the least embar- 
rassment. Her voice was quiet and steady: “Nothing has hap- 
pened yet between me and Gabriel. . . . But I love him, and 
I mean to stay with him to the end.’’ 

Aram Tomasian sprang up, horrified. He was a jealous 
brother. Any news that she was in love would have been un- 
welcome. This blow, so calmly delivered, hurt all the more. 
“And you dare say that so calmly, to me — ^to my face!” 

“You asked for it, Aram.” 

“Are you like that, Iskuhi, you? I just can’t realize. And 
what about your honour, your family? Don’t you, in Jesus 
Christ’s name, remember he’s a married man?” 

She raised her head suddenly to look at him. The conviction 
in her face was irremovable. “I’m nineteen— and shall never 
be twenty.” 

Pastor Aram blazed out at her indignantly: “In God you’ll 
grow older, since in Him your soul is immortal and responsi- 
ble. 

The louder Aram became, the softer Iskuhi: *Tm not afraid 
of God.” 

The pastor struck his palm against his forehead. I’m not 
afraid of God! He mistook for the most hardened defiance 
words that had really expressed the deepest certainty. 

“Do you know what it is you’re doing? Can’t you fed the 
stench in which you live? In there, there’s that woman lying 
unconscious, sick to death. A shamdess adulteress! But you’re 
betraying her a thousand times worse than she ever betrayed. 

622 



You’re leading a worse, more brutish life than the lowest 
Moslem women. . . . No, I’m doing the Moslems an injus- 
tice 

Iskuhi clutched at the rope with her right hand and held it 
tight. Her eyes grew bigger and bigger. Tomasian thought his 
words were taking effect. God be praised, he had still some 
influence over his sister. 

He began to moderate his just wrath: “Let’s be reasonable, 
Iskuhi. Think of the consequences — ^not only to you and me, 
but to Bagradian and the whole camp. You must reaify this 
terrible disorder. You must finish at once— make a clean sweep. 
At once. Father shall come along and take you home.’’ 

A deep breath forced its way out of Iskuhi. She leaned far 
back. Only now did the pastor perceive that her dolorous 
movement was not the result of his objurgations, but that 
something which had happened behind his back was filling 
Iskuhi with horror. When he turned, it was to see Samuel 
Avakian, breathlessly in search of Bagradian. The student 
could scarcely stand upright. His face had become a twitching 
mask, tears were streaming down it. Iskuhi pointed feebly 
towards the North Saddle. He would find Bagradian there. 
Then, without noticing Aram, she hid her face. She knew 
everything. 

It was one of Sato’s peculiarities never to sleep two nights in 
the same place. She was entirely lacking in that sense which 
most of us have, that we can always go back to the same 
place to sleep in, a secure shelter in a community, even for the 
half of life we spend in the dark. Not only did she refuse to 
sleep two mghts on the same ground, but would often change 
her bed in the course of one. 

She slept curled up, without rugs or pillow. Her dreams, 
though they were like superimposed photographic images, 
were not always merely illusory. Now and again they kept 
pointing like stubborn fingers, informing Sato of events in 

6^3 



h*sr immediate aeig^ibourhood or beyond it. TTiat happeoitd' 
tonight. Sato had gone to sleep among those clumps dE arbutus 
and myrtle from which she had watched Gonzague and 
Juliette. Something told her Nunik was near, and indeed at 
the head of a long procession. 

So Sato jumped up and went racing off to find Nunik, 
guided by the instinct of her dream. It was still dark when, 
leaving behind her the many-folded plateau of the Damlayik, 
she struck off south of the burning woods and crossed the 
mountain-ndge. At this place, apart from many red-berried 
shrubs and clumps of isolated trees, the ground becomes more 
barren and stonier. The flames had darted so far on spread 
wings. Charred trees and smgle islands of glittering shrubs 
bore witness to the great conflagrauon. But the fire itself had 
withdrawn its outposts. The springs and streams which ran 
to the valley, though not dried up, had begun to force new 
channels for themselves and bubbled up like medicinal springs, 
steaming on the frontiers of the kingdom of flames. 

Sato encountered Stephan’s funeral train in a httle, treed-in 
gully which led on upwards to the last defence posts on the 
south side. More than this fire, and the consequent necessity to 
come by the longest way round, had forced Nunik and her 
train to ascend so slowly. The real hindrance lay in the age 
and decrepitude of her followers themselves. Nor did the fact 
that four blind beggars, with wild, prophetic heads, carried 
the bier, increase the speed of the cortege. Nunik had ap- 
pointed them coffin-bearers, since they were the only men 
available whose arms and legs still had some vestiges of 
strength. She strode on ahead of them. Wartuk and Manushak 
guided them, past bushes, tree-trunks, and blocks of stone, as 
one guides a team of slowly nodding buffaloes. Stephan’s 
white-shrouded body had been laid out on one of the ancient, 
richly carved biers, half a dozen of which still stood uiilootcd 
in a corner of the churchyard of Yoghonoluk. 

Sato darted across the train hke a puppy, scampering on 

624 



idintK^ mat cuiog iiow tmay ixtaes <he did the jowney. She 
came back again and again to the bier as, widi the tappings 
and lurchings o£ the blind, it swayed along. 

Her pitiless, greedy eyes took in every detail of this young 
body, lying under its sheet. She would have given anything to 
have lifted the cloth off its iicc, to have seen how Stephan 
looked, now he was dead. Then, when they were altnost at 
the top, she left them and ran on into camp. She wanted to 
be the first to wake Kristaphor and Avakian and herald young 
Bagradian’s death. Shortly before sunrise the dead arrived in 
the big square, followed by the tapping, limping cortege. The 
bier was set down before the altar. The keenmg-wives with 
their rabble squatted around it. Nunik uncovered the boy’s 
face. She had done Ter Haigasun’s bidding as well as she 
could. The reward was earned, and could not be contested. 
Already there arose, scarcely audible, the tremulous hum of 
the dirge. 

Stephan had now become completely that Persian prince 
whom his mother had been so startled to perceive, the first 
time he had worn Armenian dress. Though Nunik had 
counted forty wounds, knife-thrusts, bruises, contusions, all 
over the body, though his back was broken, and his throat 
gaped with a horrible slit in it — they had not touched his face. 
Stephan, behind closed lids, could still see the father for whom 
he longed, coming through the high door of the station at 
Montreux. Not forty murderers had managed to efface his 
smile of delight that Dad should be hfting him in his arms 
again. He had died without being present at his own death. 
This bestial martyrdom had, by God’s grace, only assailed 
him as a far-off odour might. Now he seemed at perfect peace 
with himself, the dreamy prince. 

The first to come into the altar square, to step back ap 
palled from the bier and the crowd surrounding the altar, was 
Krikor of Yoghonoluk. 


625 



Teh Haigasun oq Ae previous evening had come in perscm 
to release Kilikian from bondage and send him back to his 
trench in the South Bastion. Krikor had been sorry to lose 
Ais Russian, whose disgrace had kept him Acre a few days 
and nights. Now he was sick, nobody came to see the apoAe- 
cary. The teaAers, his disciples, had all abandoned him, not 
only because their war-service left them no spare time, but 
because, since now they were men of action, Aey raAer 
scorned their wordy past. And gone, too, was Gonzague Maris, 
whose talk Krikor had enjoyed. 

His loneliness was twice as long as a normal loneliness, 
since, out of the whole twenty-four hours, Krikor scarcely 
slept more Aan one or two, always towards midday. Night, 
on Ac other hand, as it is wiA many eager and great minA, 
was Ac time of Krikor’s clearest perceptions, when life beat in 
him at its highest. For Ae first two nights of Kihkian’s impris- 
onment Krikor had felt the presence of a human being m 
Ae other kennel as an unbearable encroachment on his peace. 
On the Aird his irritation at being disturbed changed into a 
curious need to sec the prisoner and converse with him. Only 
scruples about undermiiung Ae Council’s authority, since 
Krikor was himself a leader, had prevented him from yielding 
to this impulse. In the fourth night it became so overpower- 
ing in his solitude, that Krikor could control it no more. Gasp- 
ing with pain, he managed to haul himself out of bed and Aag 
to the door whi A led mto the lock-up, take down the key from 
Ae niAe, and laboriously, wiA his knotted, swollen hand, 
unlock it. Sarkis Kihkian was lying on his mat with open 
eyes. The apothecary had not waked him, nor was he in Ae 
least surprised at this visit. Kilikian’s hands and feet were 
tied, but so mercifully Aat he could move with ease. Krikor 
put his oil lamp down on Ac floor and sat beside him. Kilik- 
ian’s bonds shamed Krikor’s soul. To put them on an equal 
footing, he held out his own poor hands. 

“We’re both manacled, Sarkis Kihkian. But my bon A hurt 

626 



me worse than yours <lo^ and tofflortow I shall sdll be wearing 
them— so don’t complain.” 

“I’m not complaining.” 

“But perhaps it might be better if you did.” 

Krikor passed his raki flask to the Russian, who took a long, 
reflective swig. The old man drank with equal care. Then he 
looked at KUikian. “I know you’re an educated man. . . . 
Perhaps, in the last few days, you’d have liked a book to read.” 

‘Tou’ve come too late with that. Apothecary.” 

“Which languages can you read in, Kilikian?” 

“French and Russian, if I must.” 

Krikor’s smooth mandarin’s head, with the jumping goatee, 
nodded disconsolately. “Well— you see what a man you me, 
Kilikianl” 

The deserter slowly gurgled out a laugh, that long, slow 
laugh of his, for no reason, that laugh which had so startled 
Bagradian, on the night they tried out the tents. 

But Krikor would not let himself be put off. “You’ve had an 
unhappy life, I know. . . . But why? Didn’t you live at 
Ejmiadzin, next door to the finest library in the world? I was 
only there a day, but I should have liked to stay on to the end 
of my life, among all those books. . . . And you ran 
away . . .” 

Sarkis propped himself half up. “I say. Apothecary, you 
used to smoke. ... I haven’t had a whiff for flve days.” 

The groaning Krikor dragged himself off again, to bring 
this prisoner back his chibuk, with the last box of his 
tobacco. 

“Take this, Kilikian. I’ve had to give up that pleasure, since 
I can’t manage to hold a pipe.” 

Sarkis Kilikian enveloped himself at once in a smoke-cloud. 
Krikor held up the lamp, to give him a light. 

“And yet, Kilikian, you brought your misfortunes on your- 
self. ... I can see from your £ace that you’re a monk; I don’t 
mean anything parsonic, I mean the kind of man who pos- 

6ay 



Ksaes iihe whok world in his cell. And that’s why thutgs Iwife 
gone so badly with you. Why did you run away? What did 
you think you’d find in the world?” 

Sarkis Kiiikian gave himself up so exclusively to smoking 
that it was still not certain whether he heard Krikor and un- 
derstood him. 

“I’ll tell you something, my friend Sarkis. . . . There are 
two sorts of men. That is to say there arc the human animals, 
billions of them! . . . The others, the human angels, count 
by the thousand, or, at most, by the ten thousand. Among the 
human animals also belong the world’s great men — the king% 
the pobticians, the ministers, the generals, the pashas — ^just at 
much as the peasants, the craftsmen, and labourers. Take 
Mukhtar Kebussyan, for instance. And, as he is, so are they 
all. Under thousands of different forms, they all have only 
one activity — the fabrication of dung. Since politics, industry, 
agriculture, military science — what is all that but the fabrica- 
tion of dung, even though perhaps the dung may be necessary. 
If you take his dung away from a human animal, what re- 
mains in his soul is the worst possible agony, boredom! He 
can’t stand himself. And that boredom produces everything 
bad in the world, political hatred, mass murder! But delight 
lives in the hearts of the human angels. Aren’t you, for in- 
stance, delighted, Kilikian, when you see the stars? The 
human angel’s delight is what the real angel’s song of praise 
is, of which the great Agathangelos declares that it is the 
highest activity in the universe. . . . But where was I— ah, yes, 
I was going to say, that there are human angels who betray 
themselves, who fall away from themselves. And for them 
there can be no mercy and no grace. Every hour revenges it- 
self on them . . •” 

Here that master of words, Krikor of Yoghonoluk, lost his 
thread and was silent. Sarkis Kilikian seemed to have under- 
stood nothing of all this. But suddenly he put aside the rhihnlc, 
“Therc are dl kinds of souls,” he said; “some get snuffed out 

628 



ut dwir dbildhoodi and nobodjr asks what kind of souls dxy 
wore.” 

With his fettered bands he found a razor in bis pocket and 
took it out. “Look here, Apothecaryl Do you suppose I couldn’t 
cut these ropes with that? Do you thioh I couldn’t smash up 
this whole shack with a few kicks, if I wanted to? And yet I 
don’t.” 

Krikor’s voice came hollow and indifferent, as of yore: “We 
all have such a knife, Kilikian. But what use is it to you? 
Even if you got out of here, you wouldn’t get past the camp 
bounds. All we can do is break the prison within ourselves.” 

The deserter said nothing, and he lay still. But Krikor 
fetched a book from his kennel, and, with his metal-rimmed 
glasses on his nose, began to read from it in a lulling voice. 
Kilikian, with unmoved agate eyes, lay hstening to long- 
drawn periods, which confusedly told of the being and in- 
fluence of the stars. It was the last time that Apothecary 
Krikor ever shared his treasure with a young man. It seemed 
to him for some unknown reason to be worth takmg the 
greatest trouble to get a new disciple, m the person of this 
escaped seminarist. Vain labour* The next night, the one 
just ending, the fisher of men was as lonely — lonelier — than 
ever. 

Kkikok, on two sticks, drew slowly nearer the dead Stephan. 
His yellow face remained bent over the dead face of the young 
Bagradian. Soundlessly, then for minutes together, he shook 
his bald, domed, pointed head. But these were more than the 
usual dithering head-shakes which came whenever he was 
ill. These jerks and tremblings of his denoted his utter in- 
ability to make any sense out of a world in which beings born 
to the Spirit spend their time in fanatical throat-slitting, not in 
the many delights of definitions, formulas, and couplets. How 
few human angels walked the earth! And even these few be- 
trayed their angelhood, fell below themselves. Krikor searched 

629 



Iia unique treasures of quotations for a saying which mig^ 
furnish support. But now his heart had too much grief in it 
D find the right one. Bent double, he limped back to the hut 

Among his tinaurcs the apothecary still kept a tiny, thin 
glass phial, sealed with a drop of wax. Decades ago, by the 
receipt of a medieval Persian mystic, he had tried to distill the 
authentic attar of roses, long lost to the world. Here, in this 
tiny pellet of glass, he kept his one drop of this essence, gained 
with the labours of many days. Krikor dragged his way back 
to the bier and crushed the thin glas^ ball over Stephan’s dead 
forehead. A heady perfume darted up; it spread strong wings 
and remained hovering above the forehead of the victim. ThU 
perfume was in effect that of the genius whose invisible body, 
in the words of Krikor’s authority, is composed of the essen* 
tial being of three and thirty thousand roses. 

Meanwhile Ter Haigasun and Bedros Hekim came into the 
square. At the head of the bier the priest stood rigid, his frosty 
hands hiding in the sleeves of his robe. The bony, searching 
fingers of the old doctor uncovered, only for an instant, the 
stiffened body of the boy. Then mildly and soothingly he 
smoothed down the coverlet again. The light grew brighter. 
From the streets of huts, the nearest trenches, people came 
crowding in, and pressed round the altar. 

Only the widow Shushik tore at the quiet, with long, ugly 
screams. Haik’s mother roared like a wild animal, even before 
she had seen Stephan’s body. For, to her, Haik’s fate and 
Stephan’s were one and the same. It made no difference at all 
that her son was not lying on this bier. If one had been caught 
and slain, how should the other not have been slaughtered? 
But Nunik, Wartuk, Manushak, had left her son’s carcass to 
the wild dogs, since he was only a poor peasant lad, about 
whom no one cared to trouble. Shushik did not sound like a 
rnother. She sounded hkc a dying beast, which shatters its own 
life with monstrous bellowings. A few women ramx towards 
her, she who, even up here, lived by herself apart from all, 

6ap 



refusing as obstinately as ever to have truck with any of her 
neighbours. But now they came whispering round her. She 
must keep up her courage. What had happened could only 
mean one thing— that Haik had managed to get away and 
would be safe in Jackson's protection within a few days. 
Surely if they’d killed him too, he’d be lying here! Young Ba- 
gradian had not the strength or slippery cleverness which, by 
Christ’s help, would bring Haik safe to Aleppo. 

Shushik heard nothing of it all. She stood crouched forwards, 
pressing her hands against her breasts, and bellowed dully at 
the earth. They called Nunik to witness. That ancient threw 
back her veil from her lupous face. She had still, in spite of 
their present dangerous hfe, secret sources, in the valley, of 
information, which had not dried up. She took her oath that 
young Bagradian had been caught alone, without a com- 
panion, in the neighbourhood of the village, Ain Yerab, by 
two of the newly installed inhabitants, who had taken him to 
Yoghonoluk, to the mudir. But the truth did nothing foi 
Shushik. She did not believe it. The others scarcely dared ap- 
proach the giantess, whose huge limbs struck fabulous terror 
into them all. Then suddenly the widow Shushik allowed 
them to do with her what they would. The women redoubled 
their whispering comfort. And, indeed, Haik’s mother seemed 
to be pacihcd, seemed to take hope, the further away she 
came from the corpse. A great longing for human warmth ex- 
pressed Itself in her narrow head, which fell, powerless, on to 
her right shoulder — in her huge body, which bent low down, 
to the daintily frail Armenian women. She put her arms 
round the shoulders of two of these women, and let them 
lead her where they would. 

But when, with the sobbing Avakian after him, Gabriel 
Bagradian reached the altar square, not a soul came near him. 
Indeed the crowd drew ofi a fairly long way, so that between 
him and the altar there was a space. Even the beggars and the 
keening-women scrambled up and vanished among the peo* 

631 



pl& Only Ter Haigasun and Bedros Altoimi stayed 
they were. But Gabriel did not hurry his steps; he slowed 
them. Here it was! He had thought of it for five days and 
nights, in every gruesome facet of possibility. He had no 
strength left to taste the reality. He dawdled on, step by step, 
across the space leading him to his son, as though, by walking 
very slowly, to put ofi the last shock a few seconds longer. 
His whole body seemed to dry up. It began with his eyes. 
They burned with that dryness that no winking lids can miti- 
gate. Then came the inside of his mouth. Like a strip of dried, 
crinkling leather, his tongue lay between raw gums. Gabriel 
tried to swallow up some saliva, and spit it out of him. All 
he could do was to gulp at repulsive air-bubbles, bursting in 
his fiery throat. The most horrible thing was that every effort 
at self-control ended convulsively in nothing. Every power 
in him ebbed away from his grief, which gaped hke an empty 
hole, in the midst of his being. And he himself was unaware 
that this hole, this nothing, this void within him, was pain's 
reality. Slyly he tested himself. How docs this happen? Why 
can’t I suffer now? Why don’t I shout? Why don’t I fed 
any tears? Even his grudge against Stephan was not quite 
dead. And here lay the child he had lovedi But Gabriel had 
not the power to keep a clear sight of this dead face. His dry 
eyes saw only a long white streak, and a little yellow one. He 
wanted to keep his thoughts on quite definite things, on the 
guilt that burdened him. He had neglected the boy, driven him 
to flight with scornful words. That he had come to perceive 
in the last few days. But his thoughts did not manage to get 
far; images, usdess details, most of which had nothmg to do 
with Stephan, kept rising out of the empty hole to break in on 
them. At the same time, out of the same void, there came a 
craving which, he thought, he had fully conquered, weeks ago 
—for a cigarette! If he had had any Ijcft, who knows that, to 
the horror of all the people, he might not have put it between 
his lips. He fingered unconsdously in his pockets. I a this 

6 ^ 



second he suffered for his child because, even now, he would 
have to part from him. Why was he so far away from Stephan 
that he could not even manage to see his face? Once, in the 
villa at Yoghonoluk — on the table Stephan’s clumsy sketch of 
the Damlayik — he had sat by Stephan’s bed and watched him 
asleep. Now surely, now for the last time, he must get very 
close indeed to his son who was taking away, for good and all, 
everything that had been- htmcelL Gabriel knelt by the body, 
that his blinded eyes might seize the tarrying image of that 
small face before it left him. 

Ter Haigasun, Altouni, and the others watched the leader 
of their defence come slowly up, swaying a little, to the bier. 
They saw how then he stood forsaken, opened his lips, for 
snapping breaths, as though too little air were available; and 
how his hands kept moving in irresolute gestures. They saw 
how impossible it seemed to him to keep on looking at his 
son, so that now he stood with his head averted. When at last 
he crouched on his knees in silence, an teon had run its course 
in the hearts of the thousand silent people. But now Gabriel’s 
face lay on Stephan’s face. He might have fallen asleep or, 
on his knees, himself have died there. No tears had forced a 
way out of his shut eyes. 

Yet all the women round him, and many of the men, were 
shedding them. Stephan’s death seemed to bring the stranger 
near his people again. When another age had fulfilled itself 
in the hearts of the crowd. Ter Haigasun and Bedros Hekim 
took the kneeling man under his arms and raised him. They 
led him away, without a word to him, and he, obedient, gave 
himself over to them. 

Not till they were far from the Town Enclosure, till already 
the three tents were in sight, did Ter Haigasun, on Gabriel’s 
right hand, speak the brief words: “Gabriel Bagradian, my 
son, think that he’s only gone one or two empty days ahead 
of you.” 

But Bedros Hekim, on the left, in a bitter, weary little voices 

633 



out o£ his hear^ spoke the cxmtra^Ek^u; 
B^^tadian, my child, thil^ that these next few days won^ be 
empty, but full of devils, and bless the night.” 

i^gradian stopped, not answering cither, and spread his 
arms, barring the way. They understood, turned, and left 
him. 

Jttuette’s fever had not diminished. Her swoon seemed to lie 
more heavily on her than ever. She was lying now, stretched 
sti£9y, not stirring a muscle, occupied only with her breath, 
which came, short and shallow, over scurfy lips. Was it the 
crisis of this fever, which killed or ebbed within a few days? 

Iskuhi paid no heed to Juliette. Let her live or die as she 
might decide. Iskuhi no longer thought of the ominous threat; 
enings of her brother Aram, who had told her he would cast 
her oS if by midday she had still not left the Bagradians. Ga- 
briel was standing in the tent, so upright that his head almost 
touched the canvas. But he seemed further away than the 
feverish Juliette, and not to know that she was beside him. 
She had crept across to him and pressed her head against his 
knees. Stephan’s death moved her less than Gabriel’s patience. 
Only she could tell how shy and needy his spirit was. 

And yet Gabriel had decided to take on his shoulders a 
burning world, the whole Damlayik. His own had cut his 
tendons; first juhette, and now his dead son. And still Gabriel 
stood upright. What was she, what was Aram, what were all 
the others compared to him? Insignificant insects! Uncouth, 
filthy peasants, without a thought in their heads, without a 
feeling in their hearts, unable even to see who it was had 
stepped down to them. Iskuhi felt bowed down by her own 
weakness, her own worthlessness. What could she do or offer 
to make herself worthy of Gabriel? Nothing! She put forth 
her open hand. Like a beggar. She was begging for a tiny mite 
of his pain, of the load that was on him. Her face glowed 
with devotion and agonized longing to serve, as she grovelled 

634 



didw before die man who still gave ao ngns o£ perceiving her 
jHresence. She began to whisper, ardent, disconnected nonsense, 
which startled and shamed her as she spoke. How poor she 
was, how horribly poor, that she had no power in her to help 
him with. At last, out of her despair, she became maternal, 
almost unconsciously: It’s not good to stand up when you’re 
in such trouble. In trouble you ought to lie down. Sleep. . . . 
He must get to sleep. Only sleep would help him — ^not Isklihi 
She undid his leggings, fumbled with the laces of his shoes, 
forced him to lie down on her bed. She even managed, super- 
humanly, to use her lame arm to do it more quickly. It was 
a difficult job but, since Gabriel began himself to undress 
mechanically, it was done at last. As she covered him up, she 
gasped with exhaustion. She felt a quick, expressionless glance 
pass over her. 

“I’m lying soft.” That was all Gabriel was thinking. For 
weeks he had only slept on the hard earth on the north 
trenches. His teeth began chattering. This shivering ague was 
half a pain and half a comfort Iskuhi curled herself up small, 
in a corner, so that he might not know she was there until 
he wanted her. She prayed that a heavy sleep might overcome 
him. Yet the sound he made was not the heavy Iweathing of a 
sleeper, but a faint hum, a long and even moaning, like the 
women’s dirge. Gabriel was still looking for Stephan in jhe 
empty horror of his grief. And could not find him. 

Yet this droning sound seemed to case his heart, since it 
never ceased until the minute at which, as a rule, the August 
sun pierced the chink in the door with a long ray. 

' This ray darted through the tent, and juhette’s face lay 
flaming under it. Then Iskuhi saw that the sick woman’s state 
had suddenly changed. Beads of sweat stood on her forehead. 
Her eyes, wide-open, stared; her head was raised, listening. 
Something had roused Juhette’s deepest enthusiasm. But she 
was finding it very hard to express this emotion. Her sick 
tongue made what she said scarcely intelligible. 



"Bells. . . . Gabriel . . . Listen! . . . Bells. . . . Hundreds 
o£ bells. . . . You hear?” 

The dirge on the couch broke oS, suddenly. Juliette, full of 
excitement, tried to sit up. She strained her weak voice to a 
cry of triumph: “Now the whole world’s French!” 

And what she said was true enough in its way — though her 
ear was deafened to its truth by the canllgns of her patriotic 
dream. With Stephan’s spilt blood, with the death of this only 
son, whom she had given the Armenian people, the whole 
world had mdeed become French for her. 


6 ^ 



4 


Decline and Temptation 

Stephan was buried on the thirty-first day of Musa Dagh. 
On the thirty-second came the great catastrophe. 

Whose fault was it.? That was never really cleared up. The 
mukhtars blamed one another. It remained, however, un- 
deniable that one of the first, most important orders of the 
Council had been contravened with criminal negligence, with 
catastrophic results to the whole community. And not only 
had the responsible mukhtars faded to put a stop to this “new 
custom,” they had winked benevolently— let them say what 
they liked, accuse one another, keep on insisting that the 
pasturage in the Town Enclosure was all used up. Perfectly 
true. The sheep needed fresh fodder. And this new grazing- 
ground was close under the North Saddle, well ensconced 
among rocks in the barren region of Musa Dagh, as good as 
unknown to strangers and inaccessible. That was no excuse 
for trusting the shepherds, who here as everywhere else in 
the world were dreamy old men, with a few little boys to 
help them. This sleepy fraternity, whose very nature in- 
chned to the sheep it tended, still fancied that these were 
piping times of peace. Never should the flocks, the most 
precious of all the people’s possessions, have been left without 
an armed guard — not even in the camp grazing-ground. But 
the mukhtars had trusted in God, m the closed-in pasturage, in 
the natural indolence of the Turks, and had, as usual, neither 
among themselves nor with other leaders, discussed these 
Secret infringements behind their backs. So that the Turk% 

637 



Aanki to excellent had an easy job and very {ira&af^ 

Two infantry platoons and a sapti^ detadunent were giveii 
orders to turn out at night and quietly climb Musa Dagh, 
behind the pass, by Bitias. Neither men nor officers needed 
reminding that quiet was necessary. The hal£<ampany, carry- 
ing muffled lanterns, stalked its way to the sleepy shepherd 
and their sheep. To the very last minute the miilasim in 
command did not believe that they could ever get there with- 
out a struggle. All the greater, therefore, the soldiers* astonish- 
ment at hnding only a few old men in white sheepskins, who 
quietly, without any fuss, let themselves be killed. Before sun- 
rise, at double-quid^ time, as though their booty might sdll 
be torn from them, they drove the herds safely back to the 
valley. 

This cut the nerve of those on the Damlayik. Every sheep, 
wether, lamb, of the commumty, most of the goats, and ^ 
the donkeys — ^these used from time to time as carriers and 
riding-animals— had disappeared. By the widest calculation of 
ail the animals of any kind still left in camp, they might 
manage with the greatest economy to last out another Jirec 
or four days. After that, stark famine. 

Early that morning, when Ter Haigasun heard this 
appalling news, he summoned the Council immediately. He 
Imew exactly the cffiect that this would have on the people’s 
minds. Since the outburst of hatred against Juliette, a causele^, 
purposeless embitterment had been growing hourly in the en- 
dosure. It only needed a spark to fire the mine. 

Only one leader besides Bagradian did not take part in this 
critical sitting, although he was present at it. Apothecary 
Krikor had been unable, since the previous morning, to leave 
his bed. Neither warmth nor medicine availed him. The one 
thing he longed for was peace, rehef from pain. But, since he 
lived in the government-hut, almost in the house of parlia- 
ment itself, peace was precisdy the thing most unobtainable. 
He had put up a thick wall of books between his bed of pain 

638 



and tiie cares of the wukL He lay uoabfe to move a limb. But 
oooe again it was, apparent that no wall of the spirit, no 
poetry, science no philosophy, is impenetrable enough to 
keep away the vulgar din of pi^tical strife. Today the dm, 
even from the first, was alarming. The mukhtars especially 
raised their voices. Each, and as a body, they did their best, 
by shouting, to stifle their own conscience. 

Ter Haigasun at last came out into the middle of the room 
and commanded them all to sit down. He found it hard to 
control his voice. 

“Any army in the field,” he began, “punishes such a crime 
as this with instant shooting. But wc aren’t a mere milita^ 
battalion, but a whole, suflFering people. And we’re waging 
war, not against an equal force, but a force a hundred thou- 
sand times stronger. Now realize what your lying carelessness 
means! 1 ought not to shoot you, you miserable mukhtars — 
I ought to have you torn slowly limb from limb. And I swear 
to you I’d do it with pleasure, without the slightest fear of 
God’s punishment, if it would be of the least use to any of 
us. But I’m forced to keep the appearance of unity in this 
Counal to save our authority as a body. I’m forced to leave 
you treacherously careless mukhtars to your office, because 
every change of membership might be a danger to public 
order. I’m forced to take the blame of this on myself, and, 
with lame reasons and base excuses, defend the Council 
against the just wrath of the whole people. What Wall, 
Kaimakam, bimbashi, yus-bashi, could not succeed in doing, 
you, the responsible leaders, have managed brilliantly. Tl^ 
is the end of us!” 

The subdued village mayors sank into their seats. Ter Hai- 
gasun’s eyes commanded Tomasian to speak. Aram was feel- 
ing very' uncomfortable. Though he had nothmg direedy to 
do with the herds, he was the chief superintendent of the 
enclosure and held responsible for everything connected with 
food supplies. The pastor’s narrow face looked extremely 

639 



pak. His long, pointed fingers were playing with his black 
moustache which he seemed to hate. The air at that moment 
was electric with a still antipathy between Gregorian priest 
and Protestant pastor, which usually never came to the sur- 
face. 

Ar am Tomasian stood up. “In my opinion it would be better 
to say nothing more about who’s to blame. Since what’s the 
use? What’s done’s done. Ter Haigasun himself tells us that 
we’ve got to show unity. We can’t look back, we must look 
ahead, and rack our brains to find alternative supphes.” 

This sounded reasonable enough. But the pastor’s speech 
had been unsteady. 

Ter Haigasun’s fist crashed down, dismissing it: “There arc 
no alternauve supplies.” 

But suddenly in a quiet corner an ally rose to support the 
mukhtars. Hrand Oskanian, who once, for Juliette’s sake, had 
shaved every day, which, without soap, was in itself a quietly 
heroic proceeding, now looked like a wild man of the woods. 
His huge black beard fuzzed out round his nostrils; un- 
combed, wildly bristling hair crowned his low forehead. This 
sombre schoolteacher, pigeon-breasted, with long, swinging 
arms, really did look not unlike a dressed-up ape. Perhaps this 
usually silent little man meant what he said. Perhaps he was 
only seizing his chance to revenge himself on Juliette and 
Gabriel, or on Ter Haigasun, or on all his other superiors. 
In any case the same old story came out of him, in a fierce 
tush of explodmg syllables: 

“Do you still refuse to see the truth? I’ve been preaching 
it for the last week; I’ve been shouting my lungs out to con- 
vince you. Now at last you’ve your proofi Yet Ter Haigasun 
wants to shoot our own peoplel I ask him now, what reasons 
has he for wanting to hide the truth from the Council? Why 
does he keep on saying we’ve been betrayed? Who’s he trying 
io shield? If there’d been no traitor in the camp. Would the 
Turks ever have known of this new pasturage? Never! Neverl 

640 



These meadows are omipletely hidden; shiu in among rocks. 
No one, unless he kne^y the ground, could ever have found 
them. But Gonzague Maris nosed about all over the place. 
And this is only the beginning. Next thing will be, we shall 
have the Turks in the nuddlc of the camp. That Greek will 
lead them up the steep paths, on the rock side, which he 
knows every inch of — ^whcre the mountam isn’t even de 
fended. . . .” 

The mukhtars did not need to hear that twice. This new 
interpretation of events, though they did not in the least be- 
lieve in it, restored all their former prestige. Thomas Kebus- 
syan was delighted. 

Anyone with a fixed idea has the chance of infecting other 
people with it, even big crowds. That is the secret of success- 
ful political propaganda, which obtains its effects by the 
simplest means; a hmited, but telling, vocabulary, a demoni- 
acally penetrating voice. The mukhtars and several of the 
others readily surrendered to the excitement induced by 
Oskanian’s loud persuasiveness — on their behalf. Teacher 
Hapeth Shatakhian could scarcely manage to make himself 
heard. He glowered with wrath against his old rival, whom he 
had had to put up with by his side for eight long years. 

“Oskanian,” he shouted, “I know you. You’re nothing but 
a swindling charlatan. You always have been — at every hour 
of your insolent life. You’re trying to throw mud at innocent 
people. You spit at Gonzague Mans because he’s an educated 
man, almost a Frenchman, not hke you and me, born in a 
dirty village and forced to spend our whole lives in it. I, at 
least, by the kindness of Bagradian’s brother, had the chance 
of studying some time in Switzerland — but you weren’t good 
enough, so you’ve never stuck your nose farther than Marash. 
I won’t have foul-mouthed apes saying this against the 
Bagradian family, whom we’ve all got so much to thank for. 
And, as for you, Oskanian, you’re not only slandering the 
Greek, but Madame Juliette, because she thought you so 

641 



xidnilam, -with tbe pompous way you used to sayi^ 
nothing, you silly dwarf — ^you and your poems — your cdlig- 
raphy . . 

This was unjust. Oskanian had never dared lih: his eyes to 
Juliette. Now he stopped jab^ring and, with quiet digmty, 
replied: “I don’t need your Frenchwoman’s good opinion. 
It’s far more she who needs mme. We’ve had to sec with our 
own eyes what sort of people they ar^ by God!” 

And now with accomplished demagogy the dwarf turned 
to the mukhtars. “I bless our mothers, our wives, our girls, be- 
fore whom that stuck-up slut of a European ought to go on 
her knees.” 

The slogan was dexterously aimed. Applause I 

Hrand Oskanian hurled himself full on his opponent. ‘T 
tell you, Shatakhian, you fool, that you’ve made yourself 
look silly a hundred times, with your ‘accent^ yoiu: ‘causeries/ 
and your 'conversation! your affected . . .” 

He began to munic Shatakhian’s self-satisfied French to per- 
fection— with its lack of individual quality, its nasal vowels, 
and sonorous consonants. Their discussion how to avoid cer- 
tain famine had degenerated into a farce. It was a proof of the 
ineradicable childishness in human beings that some of the 
Council went off into fits of laughter at Oskanian’s parody. 

Bedros Altouni growled, leaning over his stick: “I dioug^ 
Ter Haigasun called us here to discuss a catastrophe. I’m iu 
no mood to see you perform, Oskanian. I’ve got more to do 
than you teachers, who I’ve noticed for some time have been 
playing truant from your own school — ^and so have your 
children. As for you, Oskanian, I don’t mmd giving you the 
benefit of thinking you’re merely a htde wrong in the head. 
That young man came among us in March. He had a letter of 
recommendation to the apothecary. At that time not even the 
Wali of Aleppo knew anything about the deportations. Did 
the Greek come here then, fully intending to betray the new 
grazing-meadows on Musa Dagh to the Turks? One sees 

642 



logical heads diejr fsoduce at die teachers’ tzaiaiog' 
ooll(^ in Marash!” 

Hrand Oskanian, like the budding politician he had shown 
himself knew well enough that no illogicalities would damage 
him. It needs an effort to think things out, and nobody likes 
having to make one. But if once you can make the other 
man Imk small, that in itself is enough to get the meeting on 
your sid^ since people enjoy it, and to rouse such feelings is 
all that matters. So he answered sharply: 

“It may be. Doctor, that fifty or sixty years ago you man- 
aged to pick up a little bit of medicine. Who can prove that 
nowadays? -Sometimes you seem to be able to find something 
in that old book you carry about with you. You’ve got that 
much in common with the apothecary, who for years did noth- 
ing else but harp on his hbrary. I wouldn’t mind betting that 
half those books of his are blank paper, neatly bound. But 
you old men are all ahke when it comes to life. Otherwise 
you’d have known that, since war broke out, the government 
has been sending spies into Armenian districts— and Christian 
spies, what’s more, so that they mightn’t be noticed.” 

And he played his trump card to the mukhtars: “It all comes 
from the fact that these old jossers are as thick jas thieves with 
the Bagradians — ^who send poor little fools like Shatakhian 
Here to Europe, with the money they’ve managed to sweat out 
of us. Aren’t these rich families the cause of all the troubles in 
the first place? These Levantines have nothing to do with us! 
The whole Armenian people has to be slaughtered to pay for 
their swindling business deals.” 

This touched an important chord in the peasant souls. 
Thomas Kebussyan squinted before him, lost in memories: 
“Even old Avetis was that way. Nothing but business all the 
time — ^in Aleppo, in Istanbul, in Europe. He was never here 
two months in the year. I’ve never cared to leave Yoghonoluk. 
Not that 1 mightn’t have if I’d liked — my old woman worried 
me enough . . .” 


643 



Something began to move behind the books. Into tltt narrow 
gap between the walls of them came a groaning, hunched-up 
daape in a long white nightshirt. Krikor of Yoghonoluk, the 
had been wearing his shroud since the previous day. 
Since he did not want a Nunik or grave-digger to clothe him 
in the robes of renunciation, he had donned them himself 
hard as it was to do so, knowing well that he would not sur- 
vive to see the Damlayik taken by the Turks. His yellow 
dieeks had now such hollows in them that a five-piastre piece 
would have fitted in each. His shoulders were hunched up to 
his ears, his arms and legs swollen to disjointed clubs. When 
at last he managed to steady himself, between the two piled- 
up walls of his library, he did his best to bring into his voice 
the old, hollow, indifierent note of the sage. But that had 
ceased to be possible. His words came out tremulous, dis- 
connected: 

“This teacher here. . . . I’ve worked and worked at him 
... for years. . . . I’ve pumped the blood of scholars and 
poets into him. ... I used to think . . . because he was in- 
telbgent . . . that he had the makings of a human angel in 
him. . . . But I was wrong. . . . No one, who isn’t^ can ever 
become it. ... I used to say: ‘He doesn’t always think of 
dung.’ . . . But this teacher is far, far below the poor people 
who only think of dung. . . . That's enough of him. ... As 
to my guest, Mans. ... I haven’t told anyone, so far ... he 
promised me to do all he could for us in Beirut . . . with the 
consuls. . . .’’ 

Krikor was too weak to go on speaking. Oskanian pounced 
on him. 

“And where did he get his passports You believe any empty 
talk, but not the plainest facts.” 

'The mukhtars seemed at last to have seen the light. Yes, 
where did he get his passports? 

Pastor Aram sprang to his feet: “That’s enough, Oskanian! 
Stop this intolerable foolingl We’ve wasted our Hmp, and no- 

644 



body’s said one sensible wcMrd. And in thtee days we shan’t 
have anything more to eat” 

The sombre schoolteacher was swept away in his aimless 
malice. It was as though, in this one hour, he were being 
forced to throw up all the bile which suppressed rage and 
slights had for years accumulated. He even came out with 
the kind of gossip which the most daring matrons ventured 
to whisper only with their heads together: “Ahal even the 
pastor? Well, of course he can’t do anything else, since his 
sister has been hving so close to Bagradian . . 

Aram wanted to fling himself on Oskanian, but was pulled 
back by strong arms. Old Tomasian, red as a turkeycock, 
shouted and brandished his stick. 

But Ter Haigasun was qmcker than the two Tomasians. 
He gripped the teacher’s collarless shirt. “I’ve given you time, 
Oskanian, to prove what needs proving. Now we all know 
who spreads the poison which I've felt for a long time in 
people’s minds. 'They chose you as a leader because you 
happen to be a schoolmaster. Well, now I send you back to 
them, and I mean to let them know the truth about you. 
And, listen to me! I exclude you from all further sittings.” 

Hrand Oskanian howled that that meant nothing to him. 
He’d come there that morning fully intending to clear out 
of this collection of gossiping old men, whom the people itself 
would send packing today or tomorrow, as they deserved. But, 
for all his quick splutter of words, the once so silent teacher 
did not get to the end of what he was saying, since it was not 
a full minute before Ter Haigasun had sent him spinning, 
with a powerful kick behind, and locked the door on him. 
A sly quiet remained. The mukhtars winked at one another. 
There was a certain danger in the dictatorial methods of Ter 
Haigasun, who at any minute might do the same to one or 
another of them. But a chosen leader ought only to be deposed 
by the whole assembly, and not by any of its members, not 
even the highest. And, while the spectre of hopeless famine 

645 



came m giant strides nearer and nearer the Town JEndcMHee 
wit^ every minute, Thomas Kebussyan cleared his throat; 
wagged his hairless head, and raised what might have heen 
described as a constitutional protest against the mishandling 
o£ an elected member of the Council. For the first time a 
clear opposition began to form. Apart from the mukhtars, it 
was composed of some of the younger teachers and one of the 
village priests who disliked Ter Haigasun. The two Tomas- 
ians, stdl hot with anger and embarrassment, remained un- 
decided. But all the rest, beginning with Ter Haigasun, had, 
without knowing or wanting to do so, become the Bagradian 
party. Already the day’s discussion had centred round Gabrid 
instead of round the great catastrophe. When Ter Haigasun 
gruffly closed all further discussion of him, to come at last 
to the question of how to obtain supplies, it was already too 
late. The sinister noise outside, on the altar square, demanded 
the Council’s immediate intervention. 

Hrand Oskanian was only a weak man. In any western com- 
munity he would simply have been described as an “intd- 
lectual”; that is to say, a mediocre, book-learned individual, 
who docs not feed himself by manual labour, and whose soul 
vacillates, since, finding no place in the raw conflict of powers, 
it devours itself, avid for power and acknowledgment. So that, 
in other drcumstances, Hrand Oskanian’s case might, for all 
its grotesque absurdity, have been harmless. Here on the 
Damlayik it had to be reckoned with. Hrand Oskanian stood 
entirdy alone. And yet he was in touch with a certain world, 
an obscure, unexplored world, which today, for the first timf, 
was destined to attract attention. The teacher had in a M-na* 
been appointed government commissar over this world. In 
that role his very status as "intellectual” was enough in itself 
to make him fail. His failure vras not only due to KiltHan. 
The Russian, though the uncrowned king of the deserters, 
was silent and walked by himself. He might always be at 

646 



llte <iefitre of an event; Init he himsdf Was as inanimate as a 
«ainf on the top of a column, took ds little interest as a ghost. 
But apart from Kilikian, in these twenty-three days on Musa 
Dagh more than eighty other deserters had by degres col- 
lected on the Damlayik, and the word "deserter,” it was well 
known, covered in many cases a murkier origin. I 

Hrahd Oskanian, therefore, was the one representative of 
authority on the South Bastion. He aped Bagradian, in that he 
slept with these deserters, and strove to share their whole life. 
It was by no means easy for him to do it. The dwarf’s puny 
body had to keep stretching itself continually to try to come 
even with these toughs. He was forced, day in day out, to 
pretend to be “a devil of a fellow,” live always beyond his 
real courage and strength. Next to the wound infhcted by 
Juliette Bagradian, this company, which now he kept, was 
perhaps the second deciding reason for the little teacher’s 
strange development, of which his “revolutionary” behaviour 
in the Council had been no more than a sample. He was very 
proud indeed of having had the quarrel. He had begun to 
describe himself as “revolutionary.” 

The South Bastion was distant and solitary: as far removed 
as the sun from the altar square, and therewith from the 
spirit of order and leadership. The people showed a distinct 
dislike of having to go there. Whereas, for instance, between 
the North Saddle and the Town Enclosure there vras always a 
vivacious coming and going, at most one or two inquisitive 
people ever strayed to the rocks of the South Bastion. This 
was not fully explained by the long way, or the fact that these 
deserters had no families in camp. Now and then Bagradian ^ 
would send a surprise inspection. To his rehef, it had never 
much to report. It was clear enough: these deserters might 
consider themselves lucky to have been allowed into the camp, 
where they were fed, instead of having to live like dogs.- But 
nobody either knew, or cared to ask, how loyal they really fek 
to this people, or willing to sacrifice on behalf of it. The ^uth 

647 



fiastion was a world in itselL It lived a life into which no- 
body inquired. It undertook, in payment for regular food, to 
defend that sector; and that was all. Yet the deserters, too, in 
keeping their unspecified contract, had so far scarcely troubled 
about the camp — the enclosure, the altar square^ the Council — 
and very seldom let themselves be seen in the places where 
most people congregated. This, the morning of the catastrophe, 
was perhaps the first time they had invaded it in any con- 
siderable numbers. They had come quite aimlessly. The in- 
stinct “there’s something up” had dnven them there, the 
eternal instinct of their kind towards confusion, the break- 
down of soaal order; towards a void, which at the same time 
seems a novelty. 

There had often before been crowds on the altar square, 
meetings in which some daily occurrence had been discussed 
with great excitement. But today it presented a different 
picture from the most excited of previous gatherings. And now 
the beggars mingled their drabness with all the rest. Even 
the schoolboys, run wild since the last battle, as noisy as a 
flock of famished sparrows, as wild as any pack of young 
wolves, swarmed in, lifting up shrill voices. 

In the general confusion and alarm it was not the poorest 
class which set the tone. Not the poor peasants, the farm- 
hands, the day labourers, but a certain middling sort of “small 
proprietor.” These “small men” behaved like lunatics, flung 
up their caps, tore at their hair, flourished wild arms and 
danced about in sheer desperation. This despair was less that 
of approaching famine; it was for what they considered their 
personal loss. They kept screaming that “their” property had 
been filched — ^their last! Anyone hstening to their grief would 
have got the impression that the Turks had looted hundreds 
of thousands of sheep. Each of these small proprietors worked 
out his loss at fantastic figures. It was the same symptom of 
decline as Oskanian’s spy-fever. Ever-increasing unreason was 
taking insidious hold of these people’s minds. 

648 



At first the very poor, dazed by the shock, kept heav) 
silence. And they asked anxiously what the leaders thought 
It was small proprietors who spread the exatement among tht 
crowd. It was with these the mukhtars had to contend, whom 
Ter Haigasun had sent out to eat this broth of theirs. They, as 
the Council’s executives, were in closest touch with the mass 
of the people. 

But they scarcely managed to swallow the first spoonful 
of it. Almost before they could say anything, they were being 
shoved and punched, this way and that, all over the square. 
All their attempts to excuse themselves were lost in angry 
shouts of “You’re the only responsible oncsl You’re re- 
sponsible!” A pious he might perhaps have eased the situa- 
tion — ^the hmt, for instance, that still, in spite of this mis- 
fortune, there were enough secret stores to hand — ^might have 
re-established the old insouaance, since on Musa Dagh a few 
days seemed an eternity. None of the elders was inspired with 
the saving thought of holding up this unhoped-for “some- 
thing” to the crowd, to pacify it, at least for the time being. 
But Thomas Kebussyan, usually a canny man, who only now 
lost his head, used, under Oskanian’s influence, the worst, most 
damaging method of attempting to turn off popular wrath. He 
threw the word “betrayal” among the people. In normally 
prosperous times the people has a sound enough instinct to 
judge the truth, and a very healthy fund of scepticism. Nor 
had most of these ever taken Oskanian very seriously. But now 
the mukhtars set his foot on the ladder of politics. His career 
was launched. The mass, which, in normal times, displays 
such devastating scepticism at any suggestion of rhetoric, be- 
comes its prey at moments of catastrophe. And then the 
vaguest words, expressing the least concrete notions, take the 
strangest effect. The word “betrayal” was one of these. In 
only very few of the villagers did it evoke any clear concept 
of an actual happemng. But it served to release every hostile 
instmet and give it direction, although not, to be sure, the 

649 



(firecdoo the mukhtars would have liked. The leaider^ 
these notables and “bosses,” had quietljr arranged to sacrifice 
“the people,” and that merely to save themselves. And it was 
their fault that the communes had moved on to Musa Dagfa, 
and so exposed themselves to massacre. Pastor Hanitiun 
Nokhudian had been the only real “friend of the people." He 
and his dock, now that the convoy had arrived there, were 
living in the east, in poor but quite peaceful circumstances. 
Shouts of derision and hatred of the ^uncil bespattered the 
government-hut like a hailstorm, and kept increasing. The 
men of the South Bastion elbowed their way all over the 
crowds, and seemed to view all this confusion as a kind of 
bear-fight which, though k amused, in no way concerned 

them. But, wherever they might be, effervescence rose, like 
an aerated bubble in a drink. 

Those attempts to mollify, undertaken now by Aram 
Tomasian, also miscarried. That miserable attempt to catch 
fish, which had yielded so litde, was the pastor’s set idea, 
his mania. Everyone knew what results it had yielded so far. 
Tomasian’s attempts to hearten earned, first, laughter, and 

then, malicious scorn, and, since he refused to stop talking 
they silenced him. Everyone knew what had come of all that, 
so far! Someone in the crowd must have given the impulse. 
It had been divided up into aimlessly clustered knots, but now 
it formed into a mass and crowded on to the government-hut. 
Soon not only fists, but spades and crowbars, were being 
brandished. The men who guarded it turned pale and pointed 
their rifles indecisively— with a captured Turkish bayonet 
fixed on each. 

Inside the hut, apart from the sick apothecary, there re- 
mained only Bedros Hekim, Chaush Nurhan, and the priest. 
Ter Haigasun Was aware that, now, after the mukhtars’ and 
Tomasian s defeat, it would be the end of all authority unless 
he could manage to re-establish it. He did not doubt for an 
instant that he could do so. His eyes, which as a rule expressed 



to tttaoge a mixture t£ i^xervant shyness and cold deci^Oi 
became dnged with black. He cross^ the threshold, thrust 
aside the men of the guard, and went straight into the middle 
^ the crowd, as though he could not see them, as though they 
were air. Nor had his attitude anything in the least constrained 
or anxious in it. He moved, as his habit was, with his head 
bent a little forwards, his secluded, rather chilly hands hidden 
in his cassock-sleeves. Every step the silent Ter Haigasun took 
was left free before him. Sheer curiosity — ^what’s he after? 
what’s he going to do? dispelled any other feelings. So, at a 
measured pace, he reached the altar, on the lowest step of 
which he turned, not vehemendy, but almost as though he 
were settling down. This forced the crowd — all God-fearing 
Armenian men and women — to turn their eyes towards the 
holy table, from which sparkled the great silver crudiix, the 
tabernacle, chalice, and many lamps. Sunbeams fingered their 
way through the screen of beech leaves set up behind it. Nor 
did Ter Haigasun need to raise his voice, since sudden curi- 
osity created deep quiet around him. 

“A great misfortune has occurred” — ^he said it without any 
pained solemnity, almost indificrcndy-“and you inveigh 
against it, and want to be told who are guilty of it, as though 
that were any use at all. Before we set up this camp, you 
chose men to lead you, who now, for thirty-one days, have 
sacrificed themselves on your behalf without having slept the 
whole of one night. You know as well as I do that no other 
men among you are as well qualified to be your leaders. I 
quite undersund that you should be dissatisfied with our 
present life. I am myselfl But you chose perfectly freely to 
come up here and live on the Damlayik, instead of going, for 
instance^ on the convoy, with Pastor Nokhudian. If you regret 
Aat now— listen carefully, please — you can change your de- 
cision as freely as you took it in the first place. There’s a 
way . . .” 

The speaker paused for half a second, but his dry tone re- 

651 



tosiaed as before; he continued: “We have an alternative> 
You, as you stand here now, form a majority. But Fll also send 
for the men from the trenches. . . . Let’s surrender to the 
Turks! I’m perfectly willing, if you’ll give me the power to 
do so, to go down straight away, to Yoghonoluk, in your namCi 
Hands up, at once — ^anyone who wants me to do so." 

In disdainful silence Ter Haigasun let two full minutes 
elapse. The quiet remained as dense as ever, not a hand stirred. 
Then he climbed to the top step of the altar, and now his 
angry voice beat across the square. 

“I see that not one of you wants to surrender. . . . Well 
then, in that case, you must realize that order and discipline 
must be kept. There must be perfect quiet! Quiet, you hear, 
even if we’ve no more to eat than our fingernails. There’s 
only one form of treachery here, and its name is disorder- 
undisciplined behaviour! Whoever betrays us in that way will 
be punished as a traitor, be sure of that! WeU, now, it’s high 
time you went back to work! We’ll do our best for you. Mean- 
while, everything as usual.” 

It was the method used with unruly children; at this 
moment it proved the only right one. Not a word of protest, 
no heckling, not another reproach, though Ter Haigasun’s 
speech had not changed anything. Even the brawlers and 
agitators held their tongues; they were disconcerted. This 
alternative— disapline or surrender — worked hke a cold 
douche on these roused emotions. 

Since Ter Haigasun’s speech had dissipated the great re- 
volt, it was easy enough now to dear the altar square. The 
people, in noisy groups, went back to work, and everyday life 
seemed to begin again in spite of this horror. The guard 
blocked the mouths of the “streets," so that no further demon- 
strations might trouble the counsels of the leaders, who at last 
would have to leave then strife and face the merciless reality. 

Ter Haigasun still stood looking down, across the empty 
square, from the altar steps. Might it not be as well to form a 

652 



very strong police force, strong enough to quell, with blood- 
died, the shghtest uiurest? But the priest dismissed the thought 
with a weary gesture. What good did it do to spread terror? 
With every day of real famine, order ivould vanish of itseH. 
The Turks had no need to attack again, to make an end. 

Yet that same day saw a most surprising event, which, in all 
their torturing up and down of hope and despair, raised their 
courage again for a short while. Tins incident might, not un- 
jusdy, have been called a miracle, even though the miracle 
proved ineffective. 

Immediately after Stephan’s death the doctor had released his 
wife from all her other nursing duties and sent her off to look 
after Juhette. It was a great sacrifice on the part of Bedros 
Hekim, since the indefatigable Antaram had had sole charge 
of the hospital-hut and the isolation-wood. But it was for 
Iskuhi’s sake that the good Altouni had so decided. Iskuhi 
was worn out by long sick-nursing; she had become the 
shadow of a shade. What a force of resistance she must have 
had in her, not to have taken infection from her pauent, in 
spite of constant, close proximity— or at least not so far! The 
new nurse lived in the sick-hut, whereas Iskuhi moved to the 
one Hovsannah had relinquished. 

Juliette was one of the patients with strong enough hearts to 
resist the fever-epidemic. As Gabriel began to be ceruin that, 
little by little, his wife was turmng the corner, he pitied her 
deeply. After the critical time she had lapsed again mto un- 
consciousness, or rather into the weakest lethargy. Juliette, 
when her temperature was highest, had always been able to 
take nourishment; now she refused it; that is to say her snffj 
lifeless body refused. Antaram did her best to wake Juliette 
up. It was very slow work. Not till today had Juliette quietly 
opened her eyes, which seemed agam to look at the real world. 
She asked for nothing, wanted nothing. Presumably she was 
trying to get back to those deep-sea regions of unconscious- 

653 



aess the had left so unwillingly. Nor did her expression change 
as Gabriel came up beside her, though for the first time her 
face showed quite clearly that she was awake. But what, now 
that the vivid rouge of fever had died out of it, had become dE 
Juliette’s good looks? Her dry hair hung as dead as ashes. 
Impossible to decide whether it had bleached or turned grey. 
Her temples were two deep hollows, at the sides of her jutting 
forehead. Her cheekbones traced the hnes of a pitiful skull; 
her shapeless nose, skinned red, stood out repulsively. Gabriel 
held her shrivelled hand. Not real bone, it seemed, but brittle 
fishbones, composed its skeleton. Could it be Juliette’s hand — 
her big, warm, firm hand? This stranger, suddenly here; 
embarrassed him. 

"Well, so now you’ve got over it, ch6ric; another few days 
and you’ll be about again . . 

Words which appalled him. She looked at him and answered 
nothing. This thin, hideous patient had nothing of Juliette. 
Everything she had been was extirpated, with cruel thorough- 
ness. He did his best to smile encouragement. 

“It won’t be easy, but I think we can still manage to feed 
you properly.” 

Her eyes had still their alert, clear emptiness. But behind 
this emptiness was her fear that he might break the crust of 
coma which still protected her against the encroachments of 
the world. Juliette seemed not to have heard. He left her. 
Most of his time Gabriel now spent in the sheikh-tent. He 
could not stand the sight of human beings and so neglected 
the duties of his command Only Avakian came three times 
a day with reports of the general situation, which he heard in 
silence, without the slightest sign of interest. Gabriel scarcely 
ever emerged from his tent. He could only hear his existence 
in a closed space, in the dark, or at least the twilight. He 
walked half the day up and down the sheikh-tent or lay, with- 
out getting an hour’s sleep, on Stephan’s hed. For as long as 
his boy’s corpse was still above ground, Gabriel had strivei^ 

654 



vith the pains <d. the damned, and unsuccessfully, to recall his 
image. But now that Stephan had been lying a day and a 
night under the thin crust of eanh on the Damlayik, he came 
unbidden, at all hours. His father, lying still on his back, 
received him. Stephan, in his present phase of eternity, was 
by no means radiant and transfigured. Each time he brought 
his body, dripping with wounds. He had no thoughts of 
comforting his father, or even, of letting him know that he 
had died in his arms, without suffering much. No, he pointed 
to each of his forty wounds, to the gaping knife- and bayonet- 
thrusts in his back, to the blow, with the butt of a gun, which 
had broken his neck for him, and, worst of all, to the gaping 
sht in his throat. Gabriel had to feel these forty wounds, one 
after another. When he forgot one, he hated himself. Now he 
was at home in his grief, as a bhnd man settles into a house, 
till he knows the feel of every comer and angle. At these times, 
when Stephan came to see bun, he could not bear even Iskuhi. 
But, when the dead kept off, it eased him to have her sit by 
his side and lay her hand on his naked body, over his heart. 
Then he could even sleep for a few minutes. He kept his eyes 
shut. But Iskuhi felt how the dull thudding under her hand 
grew shy. 

His voice came from a long way off. “Iskuhi, what have you 
ever done to deserve it? There are so many who’ve got away 
and can live in Pans or somewhere.” 

He looked at her, at her white face with very deep shadows 
under the eyes, no more now than the shadow of a face. But 
her lips seemed redder than ever. He shut his eyes again. 
Everything threatened to melt into Stephan’s face. 

Iskuhi slowly drew back her hand. “What’s going to hap- 
pen? ... Do you mean to tell her? And when?” 

“That depends on how much strength I have.” 

Gabriel very soon got the chance to display this strength of 
his. Mairik Antaram called him and Iskuhi. Juliette had tried 
to sit up for the first time and had asked for a comb. When 

655 



the patient recognized Gabriel, fear came into her eyes. Her 
raised hand both sought and put him off. And the voice in 
her swollen throat would still not obey her. 

“We’ve lived a long time with each other — Gabriel — very 
long time . . 

He stroked her head, uncertainly. She spoke almost in a 
whisper, as though afraid of waking truth: “And Stqihan— 
where’s Stephan?’’ 

“Hush, Juhettel’’ 

“Shan’t I be able to sec him soon?’’ 

“I hope you’ll soon be able to see him.” 

“And why . . . mayn’t I sec him now — just through the 
curtain . . .” 

“You can’t see him yet, Juliette. ... It isn’t time yet.” 

“Not time ? And when arc we going all to be together again 
— and away from here?” 

“Perhaps in the next few days. . . . You must wait just a 
little longer, Juliette.” 

She slid down and turned on her side. For a second it 
looked as though she might weep. Two long shivers passed 
down her body Then the empty peace, with which Juliette 
had waked that morning to life, came back to her eyes. 

Outside the tent it looked as though the strong sunlight 
was blinding Gabriel, whose walk w'as unsteady. Iskuhi 
used her unlamed arm to support him. But he caught his foot 
on a rough place in the ground, and, as he fell, pulled her 
down along with him He lay silent, as though there were 
nothing in the world still worth the trouble of getting up for. 
Neither did Iskuhi rise, till she heard the steps which came 
nearer quickly. They scared her to death. Was this her brother? 
Her father ? Gabriel knew nothing of her struggles, which she 
had kept from him. At any hour now, she expected her family 
to invade her, though she had sent Bedros Hekim to her 
father, to say that Maink Antaram still needed her hdp. 
Iskuhi’s fears had been unfounded. Not the Tomasians were 

6 ^ 



approaching, but two breathless messengers, from the north 
uenches. Sweat glistened on their faces, since they had run 
hard, the whole long way. They were so excited, they inter- 
rupted each other. 

“Gabriel Bagradian — ^Turks — Turks are there — six or seven 
— they have a white flag and a green one with them. . . . 
They want to parley. . . . Not soldiers. . . . An old man’s 
the leader. . . . They’ve shouted across that they’ll only speak 
to Bagradian Effendi, and to nobody else. . . .’’ 

More than a week had passed since the Turks encountered 
their great defeat. The wounded yus-bashi, his arm in a shng, 
was already on duty again There were more regular troops 
and saptiehs encamped round Musa Dagh tlian ever. And 
yet nothing happened. Nor was there any sign that anything 
would. The men on the Damlayik watched the indolent com- 
ings and goings in the valley and could not explain why, m 
spite of these threatening and cver-increasmg forces, they 
should be left in peace. Nor could they know the reason. The 
Kaimakam of Antakiya had gone on a journey. Jemal Pasha 
had summoned all the waits, mutessanfs, and kaimakams in 
the Syrian vilayet round him, at his headquarters in Jerusalem. 
A series of unforeseen natural events demanded instant 
measures to cope with them, or the conduct of the war, in- 
deed the whole life of Syria, the most important war-area, 
would be paialyscd. 

Two plagues of Egypt, accompanied by sub-plagues and 
assistant-plagues of all descriptions, had invaded the land from 
the north and east. The eastern plague, spotted typhus, forc- 
ing its way as a localized epidemic via Aleppo to Antioch, 
Alexandretta, the mountains along the coast, was an appalling 
proof of cosmic justice. The drastic horror of this illness 
distinguished it from the milder epidemic on the Damlayik, 
which, thanks to fresh air, good water, severe isolation of all 
the infected, and indeed to other, unknown causes, still kept 

657 



within bounds. But the death-rate of Mesopotamian spotted 
typhus often stood at eighty percent. It had descended from 
the cloud of disease which hovered above the steppes of the 
Euphrates. Ever since May and June hundreds of thousands 
of dead Armenians had been rotting, on that very unconse- 
crated earth, m that godless common grave. Even wild beasts 
fled the stench. Only the poor troops had to force their way 
through that unspeakable mass of putrescent humanity. CtJ- 
iimn.<i of Macedonian, Anatolian, Arab infantry, with endless 
baggage and lines of camels, were herded on in daily route- 
marches to Baghdad. Ihc bedouin cavalry clattered among 
them. The worldly wisdom of Talaat Bey, m the Serail Palace 
of the ministry, might well have been confounded by the per- 
ception of what strange results may emerge from any attempt 
to exterminate a whole people. But neither he nor Enver let 
it perturb them. Power and the dullest insensitivity have gone 
together ever since there has been a world. The second, north- 
erly plague had certainly less of super-terrestrial consistency 
than the other, but its actual effects were perhaps more formi- 
dable. It, too, seemed an actual repetition of Biblical punish- 
ment. This plague of locusts swept down from the Taurus into 
the plain of Antioch, and so over the whole of Syria. The gul- 
lies, slopes, and ravines of that great mountain were no doubt 
the birthplace of these tough nomads, who irresistibly swarmed 
far and wide. Huge locusts, hard, shrivelled-looking insects, 
brownish, like withered leaves, clearing obstacles in one wide 
leap, as though horse and rider had grown together. They 
came on in different huge detachments, army-corps, covering 
the earth of hundreds of square miles of the sanjak, so that 
scarcely a strip of earth remained visible This planned ad- 
vance, the purposeful concentration of their descent, fully 
suggested that more than mere blind instinct guided their 
w;‘ath, that they had a plan, and leadership. They seemed in 
fact to represent the big collective idea of essential locusthood. 
It was really terrifying to watch the descent of one of those 

658 



fwanm on a garden— on dms, plane trees, yews, even on 
the hardened sycamores. Each tree, in a few seconds, would 
be wrapped in a kind of furniture-cover, a rain-proof sheet of 
rough, dark serge. Every vesuge of green shrivelled up and 
vanished under the watcher’s eyes, as though eaten by in- 
visible flame. Even the trunk was enveloped in whirling put- 
tees of insects. Nothing suggested that individuals made up 
the unity of the swarm. A single locust, caught in the palm 
of a man’s hand, betrayed the same pitiful fear as other in- 
sects, and strove to escape. Back in the swarm, he realized 
his own true nature, feclmg his own pushful greed as the 
service of a great cause. 

In August, east of the Syrian coastal area, as far as the valley 
of the Euphrates, there was no longer one green tree. But with 
trees Jemal Pasha did not concern himself. Harvesting, in 
northern Syria, never begins before the middle of July and 
lasts several weeks, since rye, wheat, and barley are not 
threshed at the same time as maize. The Moslem lets his 
sheaves he out for weeks, having little to fear from rain. When 
the locusts descended in July, they found half the grain still 
standing, the other half in loose sheaves in the fields. So that, 
within a few days, in their fashion, they had gathered the 
whole Syrian harvest, and by the middle of the month there 
was not a stalk left to be harvested in fields stripped bare. On 
this Syrian harvest Jemal Pasha had impatiently reckoned. 

The locusts had made short work of the whole commissariat 
plan of the currefit war-year. The price of bread shot up. In 
spite of the most stringent counter-measures, the inflated 
Turkish pound dropped well below its nominal value. These 
August days, in which Musa Dagh defended herself so glori- 
ously, also saw the first deaths from famine in the Lebanon 
district. 

Such was the state of affairs when Jemal Pasha summoned 
the meeung of Syrian governors at his headquarters. That 
powerful gathering was almost as perturbed as the Council 

659 



at Leaders oo Musa Dagh. The walls and mutessarifs were no 
mure able to stamp trainloads of grain out of the earth, t h a n 
the mukhtars, ewes and sheep. But the potentate s speech was 
idiort and not conahatory. By this or that day the Aleppo 
vilayet was to dehver so and so much corn to the commis- 
sariat. The officials turned pale with fury, not only at these 
outrageous demands, but even more at the pasha’s tone in 
making them. Only one among them was all zeal and humil- 
ity, and to be sure, in view of the disastrous business of Musa 
Dagh, he had very good reason for being so. The puffy, brown- 
ish face of the Kaimakam of Antakiya listened with intense 
enthusiasm to every word that fell from Jemal’s lips. All the 
other governors haggled and bemoaned, but he promised to 
do the impossible. Even if he could get no rye or wheat, at 
least he would send maize, as much as was needed. But might 
he, please, be given the necessary transport.? Jemal, in the 
course of one of these sessions, even got to the point of holding 
up the Kaimakam of Antakiya as a shining example to all the 
rest. The Kaimakam seized this chance for which he had 
striven with so much wisdom, and begged for a short inter- 
view after the sitting. This was a direct infringement of the 
laws of official hierarchy, but the Kaunakam hoped, by direct 
intervention, to win over th? imperious chief of staff to his 
side. In Jemal’s room, besides the Kaimakam, there was only 
Osman, the barbaric head of the picturesque bodyguard. The 
district governor of Antakiya obsequiously accepted a cigarette. 

“I’m addressing myself directly to Your Excellency because 
I know Your Excellency’s generosity. Your Excellency will 
no doubt have guessed my peution.” 

The small, stockily built Jemal, with his hunched shoulder, 
faced the Kaimakam, fair and square, whose loose, heavy bulk 
towered over him. The general’s thick, Asiatic lips pouted 
spitefully through black surrounding meshes of beard. 

“It’s a disgrace,” he hissed, “a filthy disgrace.” 

With bowed head the Kaimakam registered tribulation. 

660 



"I venture to ^ee entirely with Your Excellency. It’s a dis- 
grace. But it’s not my hiult, it’s my misfortune, that this dis- 
grace should have happened in my Kazidi.” 

"Not your fault? It’U be the faidt of all you civilians, if we 
lose the war because of this infamo us nonsense with the Arme- 
nians and perhaps go utterly to bits.” 

The Kaimakam seemed deeply shaken by this prophecy. 
'“It’s such a misfortune that Your Excellency should not be 
guiding our policy in IstanbuL” 

“It iS a mi^ortune, you can be sure of that.” 

“But I, after all, am no more than a minor official, who 
obediently must receive the government’s orders.” 

“Receive? Carry them out, my good sir, carry them outl 
How many weeks has this scandal lasted already? You can’t 
manage even to dispose of a few ragged, half-starved peasants. 
. . . What a success for His Excellency the War Minister, ha, 
hal and His Excellency the Mimstcr of the Interiorl” 

And the short, sturdy Jemal went across to the gigantic 
Osman, to smack him on the chest with the palm of his hand, 
so that every accoutrement hung on this waxwork jingled. 

“My pcople’d have done it in half an hour.” 

Osman grinned. The Kaimakam too smiled, bitter-sweet. 
"Your Excellency’s advance on the Suez canal was one of the 
greatest campaigns in our whole history. You must forgive me, 
a civilian, for presuming to seem to give an opinion. . . . But 
to me It always seems that perhaps die greatest feature of the 
campaign was that it shoidd have cost Your Excellency so 
few men.” 

Jemal emitted a little laugh. “Right, Kaimakam. I’m not so 
magnificent as Enver.” 

And now the Kaimakam gave its most adroit turn to the 
interview: “The mutineers of the seven villages arc extremely 
well armed. I’m not a soldier. Your Excellency, but I shrink 
from sacrificing another life against them. Your Excellency, as 
our greatest general, must know, even better than I, that a 

66 ; 



moantain fomm cm*t possibly be ckared mtbotit moartt a ii i 
ardlleiy and machine-guns. Lei those cursed Armenians he' 
victorious! I’ve done aU I could!” 

Jemal Pasha, whose savage temper it was his constant e£Eort 
to control, still could not force any calm into his voice. 

“Apply to the War Minister!” he shouted. “I haven’t any 
mountain arullery, or machine-guns either. People talk of mj, 
power— I’m the poorest commander in the empire. These 
gentlemen in Istanbul have robbed me of my last cartridge. 
And anyway— it’s none of my business!” 

The Kaimakam became very grave and crossed his arms, as 
if in salaam, upon his breast. “Your Excellency must forgive 
my daring to contradict you. But this matter does, perhaps 
concern you a little . . . since not only civil servants are being 
made to look ridiculous in the eyes of the whole world by this 
defeat, but even the troops of the Fourth Army, which bears 
the famous name of Your Excellency.” 

“What do you take me for?” scoffed Jemal. “You don’t get 
me to bite so easily.” 

So, to all appearances crushed to earth, and yet, inside him- 
self, not quite so hopeless, the Kaimakam retired from the 
presence, past the highly decorative Osman. Nor did hope de- 
ceive him. This same Osman came after midnight to his 
quarters, to rouse and lead him at once to Jemal. The Syrian 
dictator was often pleased to prove, to himself his power, to 
others his originality, by such surprise invitations at all hours. 
He did not receive his late visitor in uniform, but wrapped 
in a fantastic burnous, which gave his by no means irre- 
proachable figure the aspect of a picturesque bedouin sheikh. 

“Kaimakam, I’ve thought over that whole business of yours, 
and I’ve reached some decisions . . .” 

He struck the table with the flat of his red, pldieian hand. 
“The empire is being sacrificed to crazy and incompetent 
careerists.” 

The Kaimakam waited, in mournful confirmation, for what 

662 



some. Otmvi puSKled his s|dea<iouts in dte doorwayt. 
^When does that fellow get a chai^ to sleep?” the governor 
of Antioch reflected. 

Jemal paced up and down the room. ‘Tou’re right, Kaima- 
kam, this disgrace of yours affects me also. It must be wiped 
out, it ought never to have been, you understand me?” 

Still the Kaimakam waited, saying nothing. The little gen- 
eral’s spitefully bearded face glanced up at him. “You have 
ten days, after which the whole thing must be wiped out 
and forgotten. ... I shall send you one of my most efficient 
officers and everything necessary. . . . But you answer to me, 
mind! ... I want to know nothing more about it.” 

The Kaimakam was clever enough not to say a word in 
reply. 

The general took two steps back. Now he really did look 
like a hunchback. “I want to hear no more of this whole 
business! If I have to hear any more of it, if it is not all got 
smoothly out of the way, I shall have all those responsible 
shot . . . and you too, Kaimakam, will go to the devil.” 

Thb freckled mudir, installed in Villa Bagradian, was roused 
twice that day from his kef-siesta. The first time to receive a 
letter from the Kaimakam, apprising him of his immediate 
arrival. But when the sergeant of the saptiehs appeared a 
second time to drag him out of the cool villa into grilling 
midday heat, he showered wild curses on the head of that 
unfortunate disturber and longed to thrash him. And yet, 
once in the church square of Yoghonoluk, the mudir quick- 
ened his pace;, since a really unusual sight awaited him. In 
front of the church stood a yayli, not drawn by horses even, 
but by mules. Nor was it even a proper yayli; it was an old- 
fashioned coach of some kind, with high wheels. Inside the 
coach sat an old gentleman whose garb and being suited it to 
perfection. A dark blue robe of silk reached down to his feet, 
dothed in the softest goatskin slippers. Around his fez, this 

663 



very dbtinguished'looking old gentleman wore the tarbush- 
cloth o£ the pious. The ancient’s soft, almost spinsterish fingers 
kept counting the beads of an amber rosary. The mudir per- 
ceived afonce, in this old gentleman, an Old-Turkish patriaan, 
a partisan of the opposite camp, which, in spite of the revolu- 
tion, still retained vestiges of its power. Then he remembered 
having met the old gentleman before, on two or three occasions 
in Antakiya, where people had saluted and done him rever- 
ence. 

The yayli did not stand there alone. A hne of sumpter 
mules, heavily laden, stood behind it, scraping and clattering 
with their hoofs. Besides their drivers, the mudir saw two 
other elderly Turks, with mild, almost transfigured-looking" 
faces, and a thin figure, leaning against the carriage door, 
whose face was thickly veiled. The young man from Salonika 
put his hand politely to his forehead to greet the anaent. 
Agha Rifaat Bereket beckoned him over. The disciple of 
Ittihad, enemy as he was of all tradition, came straight up to 
the carnage to hear what the old man had to say. 

“We are on our way to the Armenian camp. Give us guides, 
Mudir.” 

It was made to sound like an order from above. The mudir 
stiffened. “To the Armenian camp? Arc you wrong in the 
head?” 

Rifaat Bereket took no notice at all of this jovial question. 
On the back scat of the coach lay an ultra-modcrn-Iooking, 
yellow pigskin attache-case, in glaring, bristling contrast to the 
rest of that roomy, comfortable equipage. The soft white fin- 
gers pressed back the catch. 

“I have a mission to the Armemans.” 

The Agha handed his tcskerc to the red-haired mudir, who 
began to investigate it. When he could still not manage to 
find what he wanted, Bereket patiently commanded him: 
“Read the inscription above the seal.” 

And indeed the mudir obeyed with such alacrity that- he 

664 



even read it aloud: “‘The holder of this passport to be given 
free admission to all Armenian deportation campsj such admis- 
sion not to be refused by any pohtical or military ofEicial what- 
soever.’ ” 

The young man passed back the document into the coach, 
in his beautifully manicured fingers. “This isn’t a case of a 
deportation camp, but of a nest of rebels, dangerous traitors, 
who’ve mutinied and shed Turkish blood.’’ 

“My mission is to all Armenians,” the Agha mildly re- 
plied, stowed away his teskere very carefully in his brand- 
new, business-like attache-case, and, out of it, drew yet an- 
other document, the outward appearance of which was obvi- 
ously, in itself, enough to conjure with. It was a big, intricately 
folded sheet, sealed with a complicated seal. The mudir’s eye 
had first to get accustomed to the flourishes of Arabic calhg- 
raphy before he could decipher the name. Sheikh ul Islam, 
together with the demand, which that spiritual Supreme Head 
of Turkey had addressed to every orthodox Moslem, that they 
should assist to whatever he might require of him, no matter 
what such demands might seem to entail, the orthodox bearer 
of the document. “What influence that world of moths still 
possesses'” it occurred to the mudir. The Sheikh ul Islam, in 
spite of Enver and Talaat, was still one of the most powerful 
officers of state. This medieval screed was therefore an 
official order, which it might cost him dear to disobey. He 
eyed the sumpter mules, heavily laden with sacks of grain. 

“And where do you intend to take these sacks?” 

Rifaat Bereket, as his custom was, made his answer digni- 
fied but discreet. “They have the same destination as I have.” 

The mudir answered ceremoniously, though it annoyed him 
that the old Agha should remain quietly seated before him, 
the government representative, as though he were merely 
concerned with an official of the ancien regime. 

“I don’t know, Effendi, whether you’ve got this matter clear 
in your mind. The Armenians in this district have risen in 

665 



anns against the government azul set a id)di c a iq> an 
Musa Dagh. They’ve dared to defy the Turkish army, airm 
themselves, and kill Turkish soldiers. Now we’re starving 
thwn out And you come here, Agha, with sacks of graim” 

Rifaat Bcrcket heard all this with Ids head wearily mdined. 
Not till the mudir had finished, did the old man’s rather 
prominent wrinkled eyes look him up and down. “Were 
you yourselves not once in arms against your Padishah? Did 
not you oppose his soldiers, sword in hand, as attackers even? 
Revolutionaries should never appeal to lawfully constituted 
authority.” 

And for the third time, as he was saying it, the Agha felt 
in his magic attache-case. It was almost like an incident in a 
fairy-tale to sec him draw forth his mightiest charm; a parch- 
ment scroll headed with the Sultan’s turban, decked with 
gems as signet. The supreme lord and Caliph, Mohammed 
the Fifth, commanded, in this irade, all his subjects, and in 
particular the civil and military authorities, that they should 
aid in all his undertakings the Agha Rifaat Bcrcket of Anta- 
kiya, and set no obstacle in his way. 

The red-haired mudir stared at it uneasily. The “old gang” 
seemed to have turned up in full force, he must sayl Hastily, 
and without enthusiasm, he set the Padishah’s name to heart, 
mouth, forehead. Certainly the gesture did not in the least 
consort with the young man’s light “summer suiung,” bright 
red tic, canary-coloured gloves. Well, what ought he to do? 
Impossible to let rebels be provisioned. Equally impossible to 
impede any man under such obvious special protection from 
His Majesty the Sultan. But the slick young mudir from 
Salonika was wily enough to hit on a compromise, which at 
last, much against the grain, after many silent curses, he pro- 
posed. The Agha himself should be allowed past the Turkish 
outposts round Musa Dagh. But his train of mules with their 
provisions must be left behind in the valley. And in this the 
Agha Rifaat Bereket could not obtain the least concession. 

666 



Hiere wds a grain famine all over Syria. The Kaknakam riE 
Antakiya rixust decide the destination of these supplies. On 
the other hand, there were a few smaller sacks of coffee and 
sugar, and some bales of tobacco. These luxury articles coidd 
proceed. To that at last the mudir consented, after much per> 
suasion. Finally he made inquiries about the compaxuons of 
the Agha. 

“They are my servants and assistants. Here are their pass- 
ports, i^amine them, please. You’ll find them in orderl” 

“And this man here. Why is he veiled, hkc a woman?” 

“He has an ugly skin disease on his face and must not ex- 
pose it to the air. Shall he lift his veiP” 

The mudir grimaced and shook his head. More than an 
hour had passed before the yayli could proceed in the direc- 
tion of Bidas. An infantry platoon, commanded by a mulasim, 
riiarched beside it. Two sumpter mules, with coffee, tobacco, 
sugar, and three others, for the Agha and his two assistants 
to ride, brought up the rear of the procession. When their way 
was clear before them, Fifaat Bereket left his coach and 
asked the mulasim to halt his men, to avoid misunderstandings 
with Armenians, who might open fire. The officer welcomed 
this suggestion and encamped, in regulauon style, in the wood 
with his soldiers. The three old men rode on, sitting sideways 
across their donkeys, while the two sumpter mules were driven 
afttr them. The veiled man walked beside. In his right hand 
he carried the green banner of the prophet, in his left, the 
white flag of peace. 

They sat facing each other in the tent. The Agha had de- 
manded this talk without witnesses. Now the Agha’s com- 
panions squatted outside, beside the sumpter mules, whose 
muleteers had unloaded their sacks and bales. The crowd 
round this group increased every minute. The Agha was as 
composed and digmfied, he waited there as ceremoniously, as 
though he had been sitting at home in the mild afternoon twi- 

667 



lig^t o£ his selamlik. The amber beads slipped through his 
fingers as uninterruptedly as time itself. 

“I have come to you, Gabriel Bagradian, as the friend of 
your grandfather, the friend of your father, the friend of your 
brother Avetis; and I have come as the friend of the ermeni 
millet. You know that I have worked in the cause of peace, 
now destroyed for ever, between our two peoples. . . .” 

Here he interrupted his litany. His pitying eyes examined 
the face of this once so prosperous-looking young European. 
Never would the Agha have recogmzed that shrunken, wildly 
bearded face. He thought for a moment before he continued: 
“There is guilt on your side and on ours. . . . This I only 
say so that your judgment may not err, in spite of all that has 
happened, nor your heart be hardened. . . .” 

Gabriel’s face looked graver and smaller still. “He who has 
come as far as I have come knows no more of guilt. No guilt 
can trouble me now, no right, no revenge.” 

Rifaat’s hands lay still. “You have lost your son.” 

Bagradian’s hand had happened to stray into his pocket. 
There it closed round the Greek com, which he still kept with 
him as an amulet. “To the inexphcable, in us and above us.” 
He held it up. “Your gift has brought me litde good fortune, 
Agha. The com with the king’s head I lost on the day I lost 
my son. And the other ” 

“You still do not know your last day.” 

“It IS very close. And yet it seems to come far too slowly. 
I often long to rush down into the midst of your people, so 
that at last — at last! — it may ail be over.” 

The Agha glanced at his shimmering hands. “You will not 
debase your life, but raise it. You, Bagradian, have more 
strength than most men. Yet God decides all.” 

The yellow attacheose fey beside Rifaat’s crossed legs. On 
it, ready to be delivered. Pastor Harutiun Nokhudian’s letter 
to Ter Haigasun. 

“As you know, Bagradian, for months I have travelled on 

668 



your behalf. I have renounced the peace of my old age. AnC^ 
with God’s help, I shall still get as far as Deir ez-Zor. But my 
first journey in Syria was to you. You have friends both abroad 
and here in Turkey. A German pastor has collected a large 
sum of money for you, and 1 keep in touch with him. I had 
managed to get together fifty sacks of grain to give you. It 
was not easy. They would not let them through. I felt they 
would not. But the Kaimakam will not succeed in confiscating 
them. They shall go to your brothers in the camps. Yet these 
sacks of gram were not my reason for*ciimbing to the top of 
Musa Dagh. . . .” 

He handed over Nokhudian’s letter. “This letter will tell 
you what, otherwise, you would never have heard, the fate of 
your countrymen. But at the same time you must remember 
that our people is not all composed of Ittihad, of Talaat, Enver, 
and their servants. Many others, besides myself, have left their 
dwellings and gone eastwards to help the famished. . . 

To be sure the Agha Rifaat Bcrckct was a very fine man 
indeed. He deserved that Gabriel should kneel to him, in the 
people’s name. But these long, detailed descriptions of acts of 
benevolence and self-sacrifice did nothing to assuage Gabriel’s 
bitterness. Real as these sacrifices were, their enumeration 
made him impatient. “You may help the exiles, but not me.’’ 

The old man kept all his equanimity. “1 could help you, my 
son. That is my most important reason for sitting hcie in your 
tent.’’ 

And now, in the same even monotone, the Agha explained 
his plan for saving Gabriel, whose heart stood still as he lis- 
tened. Bagradian, so began the Agha, must have noticed the 
five men of his escort. The two greybeards were members of 
a pious confraternity, engaged on the same duty as himself; 
the two muleteers were old servants, members for many years 
of his household in Antakiya. But the fifth man was a case 
apart. He had the deaths of many Armenians on his con- 
science;, and, in Istanbul, the Sheikh of the Thieves of Hearts 

669 



liad coiwatsd Now he repented. He had taken an oai& 
to do penance for these deeds done by the baser powers o£ hu 
sold and make amends to the Armemans for the wrongs which 
his hatred had inflicted on them. This man, then, was ready 
to change clothes with Gabriel Bagradian and disappear. 
Down on the church square, the mudir had closely inspected 
all their passports and made a list of their names. It was al* 
most a foregone conclusion that, when they returned, no one 
would ask for their teskeres a second time. But if, against all 
expectation, the mudir began to make thmgs difScult, Gabriel 
need only show his double’s passport. Nor would the mulasim 
and his soldiers, who had counted six people in the camp, and 
would take six people back to the village, be likely to suspect 
in the least that all the six were not the same. He^ the Agha, 
as an honourable man, disliked such attempts to defraud the 
pohee; but here it was a question of bringing the last of the 
Bagradian family into the shelter of his house in Antakiya. 
This he must do for the repose of the soul, and in memory oi^ 
the blessed Avetis, of whose friendship he had received a hun- 
dred proofs; he, a Turk and a young man, from the old 
Armenian. 

Gabriel felt stifled. A wind of life blew so mightily through 
him that he stumbled out of the tent to breathe. He saw the 
escort squatting in silence. He saw the man of the oath, who 
had long since taken oS his veil. A dull and ordinary-looking 
face, on which neither the murder of Armenians nor the oath 
to expiate had left any percepuble traces. He saw the villagers 
crowding round them, all of whom seemed shaken ivith wild 
excitement. He saw Iskuhi, standing outside the sick-tent. And 
sh^ too, was as unreal and remote as everything else. Nothing 
viras real, save the thought of living: A dark room in Rifaat’s 
house. The wooden shutters of the wmdow, outside which is 
the inner court with its fountain, arc closed. And there, for- 
getting all, knowing of nothing, to lie, awaiting a second birth. 

When, after several minutes, he had calmed down, Gabriel 

670 



went "back into tbe tent. He kitted! the old man’s hand. ’’Why 
didii’t you come to me before, Father, when everything was 
still easy, when we lived down there in the villa . . . ?” 

‘1 hoped for a very long time that this fate of yours could 
be averted. And, from you, it can still be averted.” 

“No, by me, too, it must be embraced.” 

“Are you afraid? . . . We can wait till it’s dark. There 
won’t be the slightest danger in it.” 

“Day or night! It’s not that, Agha.” An embarrassed little 
pause. “My wife has nearly died, and today she’s beginning 
to recover.” 

“Your wife? You’ll find other wives.” 

“My child is buried up here.” 

“It’s your duty to beget another, to carry on your line.” 

The old man’s heavy eyes still looked impassive. 

Gabriel answered him so softly that, no doubt, he did not 
understand: “No one who stands where I stand can begin 
again from the beginning.” 

The Agha cupped his small, nimble hands, as if to catch the 
rain of time in them. "Why do you think of the future? Think 
of the next few hours!” 

The late afternoon light was filling the tent, the light of 
leave-taking. Gabriel stood up, unceremoniously. “It was I 
who first gave the seven villages the idea of this camp on 
Musa Dagh. I organized the whole resistance. I was leader in 
the battles against your soldiers, thanks to which we still re- 
main. I am, and shall be, guilty — ^responsible— if, in a few 
more days, your people torture us all to death, even our sick 
and httle children. What do you say, Agha? Can I simply 
leave them in the lurch?” 

To which Agha Rifaat Bereket made no answer. 

Gabriel had the Agha’s gifts carried at once to the altar square, 
so that the Counal might set about distributing them. Mainly 
it was only a question of sugar, coffee,' a little tobacco. But 

6eji 



the muleteers had also managed to smuggle in two sacks of 
rice. Since these gifts had to be shared out to two thousand 
families, it can be imagined how microscopic each ration was. 
What did that matterl To be able to drink hot coffee again, in 
little sipsi To be able to draw tobacco smoke far down, into 
the very pit of one’s stomach, let it out slowly, through nose 
and mouth, stare vacantly at the floating cloud, without any 
care, any tomorrow. The actual value of these gifts was far 
less than the revived morale engendered by them, and this on 
a day of general disaster. And the Turks left them all their 
mules, the two sumpter mules and those they had ridden. 
Only the old Agha still kept his, to ride into the valley. 

Thus, then, the benefactor and his five followers went back 
with unbandaged eyes to the North Saddle. The man of the 
oath went on ahead with the green and white flags. He seemed 
neither put out nor relieved at having been deprived of his 
good work. As guard of honour, besides Gabriel, Ter Haiga- 
sun, Bedros Hekim, and two mukhtars followed the strangers. 
Around them eddied a crowd of bewitched villagers. This talk 
in the sheikh’s tent, since no one knew what had passed there, 
had become a source of fantastic hopes. The Agha walked 
through a fog of blessings, tearful petitions, hopeful question- 
ings. He could scarcely go forwards. Never, not even in the 
banishment camps, had the Agha Rifaat Bereket seen such 
faces as here on the Damlayik. The savage, feverish masks of 
men grimaced round him avidly. Waving arms, as thin as 
twigs, thrust out of tattered sleeves, held children close up to 
his face, as the women begged. Nearly all these children had 
swollen heads, on the thinnest necks, and their huge, staring 
eyes had a knowledge in them forbidden the children of 
humankind. The Agha perceived that not even the most 
brutal convoy could, in its effects, be more dehumamzing than 
this isolation, this cutting off. He 'Dclieved that now he could 
understand by how much this draining off of the spirit ex- 
ceeds in cruelty even the massacre of the body. The most 

6?2 



horrible thing that had been done was, not that a whole peo* 
pie had been exterminated, but that a whole people, God’s 
children, had been dehumanized. The sword o£ Enver, strik- 
ing these Armenians, had struck Allah. Since in them, as in 
all other men, even unbelievers, Allah dwells. And whoso de- 
grades His dignity in the creature, degrades the Creator in 
his victim. This, then, is God-murder, the sin which, to the 
end of time, is never forgiven. 

To the old man, it felt as though he were walking through 
clouds of ashes, the thick death<loud of the whole burnt-up 
Armenian race rising between time and eternity. 

The Agha walked bent over his stick, growing older and 
older, more deeply bowed. Now he kept his eyes on the earth, 
which had brought forth all this and bore it. His little feet 
in their soft shoes tripped eagerly, unused to walking. Pressing 
his white beard close against his chest, he hurried on like a 
fugitive whose strength may fail. He had ceased to hear the 
sounds of these petitioners, see their arms imploring him. 
Away out of this! But Rifaat’s strength took him only as far 
as the trenches along the North Saddle. There at the sight of 
the gaping decads, a violent giddiness forced him to earth. 
His two servants, the muleteers, came hurrying anxiously. 
The Agha was a sick man. The French hekim in Istanbul had 
warned him against overexertion. The more staid of these two 
servants drew out of the green velvet bag which he always 
carried for his master the smelling-salts and the little case of 
liquorice which stimulates the heart. 

When the Agha had quickly recovered, he smiled up at Ter 
Haigasun and Gabriel, who were bending over him “It’s 
nothing. . . . I’m old . . . walked too fast. . . . And then 
. . . you give me too much to carry. . . .” 

As he rose with the help of his two companions, he was 
conscious that his task would never be finished, that he never 
would get to Deir cz-Zor. 

It was nearly midnight before his yayli reached the house in 

673 



Antakiya. He was lamed with exhaustion. Nevertheless, he 
wrote at once, in intricate and elaborate calligraphy, a letter 
directed to Nersimi Bey, but Intended for the Christian pastor 
Lepsius, to whom he gave precise account of all he had so far 
achieved. 

And, at about the same time as the Agha Rifaat Bereket wrote 
this letter to Dr. Lepsius, the soul of Krikor of Yoghonoluk 
freed itself from his agonized body. That night, before he 
went to sleep, the teacher Hapeth Shatakhian had been bitten 
with remorse on Krikor’s account. And so, at two o’clock in 
the morning, this negligent chief-disciple of the philosopher 
tiptoed into the government-hut, came softly over to Krikor’s 
bed, faintly lit, peeped over the wall of books, and whispered 
gently, so as not to wake the sick man, if he were asleep: 
“Apothecary — ^huUo, how arc you?” 

Krikor lay on his back. His breath came strangled. But his 
wide-open eyes were very calm. He chid the teacher because 
of the stupidity of his question. 

Shatakhian edged his way round the rampart of books. He 
felt Krikor’s pulse. “Have you much pain'”’ 

Krikor gave his answer a double meaning: “I have when 
you touch me.” 

The teacher squatted down beside the sick man. “I’ll stop 
with you tonight. It’ll be better. . . . You might need some- 
thing.” 

Krikor did not answer. He was far too occupied with his 
breath. 

But the teacher became soulful; he mourned: “I’m thinking 
of the good old days. Apothecary; our walks together, and all 
your sayings.” 

Krikor’s yellow mandarin face lay there immobile. He an- 
swered in a breathless, nasal head-voice. His goatee never 
stirred. “None of that was worth very much.” 

These defensive words were enough to release all Shatakh- 

674 



ian’s sentimeatality: 'It was worth a great deal. . . . For yot^ 
and for us. . . . You know I’ve lived in Europe, Apothecary. 
I can say that French culture has become a part of my flesh 
and blood. . . . Over there, one sees and hears and learns 
thousands of things: lectures, concerts, theatres, pictures, the 
cinema. . . . And you see, you were all those things for us, in 
Yoghonoluk — and more. . . . You brought us the whole world 
and explained it to us. . . . Oh, Apothecary, what might you 
not have become in Europe!” 

These encomiums visibly worried Krikor. He answered in 
a haughty breath: “I’m quite satisfied . . . aS it is. . . .” 

Nearly half an hour more elapsed before that strange, fal- 
setto voice resumed: “Teacher I Instead of talking nonsense, 
could you manage to do something intelligent^ . . . Go over 
there to the shelf with the medicine on it. . . . You see that 
round black botde? There’s a glass beside it. . . . Fill it up.” 

Shatakhian, pleased to be of some real use, obeyed and 
brought back the brimming glass, which gave out a strong 
scent of mulberry brandy. “Well, you’ve prescribed yourself 
the best medicine. Apothecary!” 

He put his arm under Krikor’s head, propped him up, and 
set the glass to his lips. The sage of Yoghonoluk emptied it in 
long draughts, as though it were water. After a while his face 
had colour in it, a mocking gbnt had come into his eyes. 

“That’s it . . . best medicine . . . against pain . . . but now 
I must be alone. . . . Go to bed, Shatakhian.” 

Krikor’s new expression and his more vivacious tone made 
the teacher uneasy. "I’ll come in to see you tomorrow. Apothe- 
cary — the first thing . . .” 

“Yes, come tomorrow — ^as early as ever you hke. . . . But 
now you might just put out that lamp . . . it’s the last oil . . . 
over there, my little candle . . . hght it, please . . . put it up 
on the books . . . that’s it. . . . That’s all . . . go and sleep, 
Shatakhian.” 

When the teacher was again beyond the rampart, he turned 

675 



and looked back, over the books, at his master. “If I were you, 
Apothecary, I shouldn’t worry about Oskanian; we’ve always 
known what he was like. . . .’’ 

This last piece of advice was entirely superfluous, since now 
the apothecary inhabited an entirely peaceful world, in which 
such absurd puppets as Oskanian had ceased to figure. He 
stared fixedly out, without moving his eyes, and rejoiced in 
the luxury of painlessness. His heart was jubilant. He counted 
his internal assets. How light his baggage, how happy he feltl 
He would lose nobody, nobody would have lost him. All these 
human things seemed so remote, far away behind him: prob- 
ably they had never existed. Krikor had most certainly always 
been Krikor, a man made differently from his kind. The peo- 
ple pity those who have to be alone at such a minute. This 
Krikor could not understand. Was there anything more glori- 
ous than such solitude? A delightful warmth stole up through 
his body. Krikor felt his limbs become supple again, his joints 
lose their stiffness. With a jerk, which did not hurt him in 
the least, he turned towards the light. Small white moths and 
huge dark ones circled the flame. Krikor thought: If it goes on 
like this, I shall get well. Not that he cared. He reflected upon 
this dance of insects. Myriads of stars in the form of butter- 
flies, whose delicate bodies have been composed of the ashes 
of burnt-out worlds, as the Arab astronomer Ibn Saadi had 
already demonstrated His mind became clouded, and he slept. 
But to wake was horrible. The kennel had shrunk mysteri- 
ously. Krikor could scarcely see. The moths had increased by 
thousands till they almost obscured the flame of the badly 
made candle. 

No breath would come to the sick man. Desperate, gurgling 
sounds forced their way out of him; he jerked himself up and 
forwards, without noticing the pain. Viewed from without, 
it was a choking fit, but its inner reality was far worse. It was 
the monstrous sensation of not being able to hold out, and not 
in any temporal, passing sense, but a “not being able to hold 

676 



out” which would go on and on; through all eternity. It was 
the major punishment of any hell that may exist. And this 
eternal “not being able to hold out” had its definite counter- 
part in the mind. Knowledge that one knows nothing, an 
ignorance that yet knows all, are a pale description of this 
ocean of half and half, of perceptions just begun, thoughts 
rapidly fused into one another, teachings misunderstood, errors 
devoured. The most trivial things never really grasped! Oh, 
gruesome impotence of the spirit, which every blade of grass 
confounds. In this sea of nauseating rubbish Krikor was 
drowning. He struggled to save himself, escape. With a ratde 
in his throat he crawled out of bed and clung to his rampart 
of books. When, in his weakness, he lost his hold on it and 
fell on his back over the bed, he pulled down the top layers 
after him, and with them the extinguished candle. The books 
came thudding down round Knkor’s body, as though to em- 
brace him and hold him fast. For a very long while Krikor 
lay as he had fallen, relieved that he could breathe again, that 
his stifling fit of complete ignorance had released him. His 
pain came back on him in waves. Every finger burned as 
though he had just pulled it out of the fire. 

And then the apothecary’s books rendered him a last unique 
service — the read, the unread, the skimmed-through, the be- 
loved. He stuck his burning hands into the leaves. Their pages 
were as cool as water. And more than that. A thin, icy peace 
came streaming into him from the intellectual life-blood of 
these books. Even with numb fingers, in the dark, Krikor 
could distinguish one from another. A final impulse: “Alas 
for this pleasure*” Then the burning died, throb by throb. 
The soft release from pain stole higher and higher A shim- 
mer of leaden daylight gleamed in through chinks in the 
log hut. This Krikor did not even notice, since now he ex- 
perienced the supreme. It began with a great awareness of 
quiet, as if each thud of his ebbing pulse were saying: “I am 
die first person, I am the first person.” And then that thing 

677 



began to grow which was— Krikor of Yoghonoluk. This is 
already a misstatement. Words, meant for time and space, 
cannot say it. Perhaps it was not so much a growing of the 
thing which was Krikor of Yoghonoluk, as a shrin^g to* 
gcthcr, shrivelling up, of the thmg which had been the world. 
Yes, the world crumpled with giddy speed: the hut, the Town 
Enclosure, Musa Dagh, the house down in the valley, and all 
that surrounded it. It could not have been any other way. It 
had no volume, since it was made of the ashes of burnt-out 
stars. At last only Krikor of Yoghonoluk was left, standing 
alone. He was the All, he was more than the All, since around 
his head moth-worlds danced, without his observmg it. 



The Altar Flame 


5 


Ter Haigasun, after a long talk with Pastor Aram and Al- 
tounl, had decided that what was left of their provisions need 
not be economized. Would it not be altogether senseless to 
eke out life, and its pain along with it^ Already — before real 
hunger had set in— there were enough enfeebled people on 
the Damlayik, old men and women, women and children, 
who sank to the ground and could not get up again. This 
slow grinding process had proved itself the worst lund of de- 
struction. And the priest was willing to let the process be cur- 
tailed. So that, in the first September days, Bagradian’s two 
cows were slaughtered, with all the remaining goats and kids; 
the milk of the she-goats was by now too thm, and came too 
sparsely, to be worth thinking about. Then came the sumpter 
and nding-mules, whose leather flesh it was almost impossible 
to boil or roast. Yet with tail, skin, hoofs, and tripe, these 
animals yielded great heaps of food, which both disgusted and 
satisfied. Added to these, there were Rifaat Bereket’s coifee 
and sugar, about a quarter of a pound to each household. But 
the dregs were cooked up, again and again, so that coffee-pots 
became like the widow’s cruse. This drink inspired, if not 
cheer and comfort, at least a pleasant surrender to the mo- 
ment Tobacco was almost as effective. Ter Haigasun, in spite 
of protesting mukhtars, had wisely ordamed that by far the 
greater share of it, four whole bales, should be divided among 
the men of the South Bastion— among ne’er do wells and un- 
reliables. Now they could wallow in smoke as never before 

679 



at the best times in their lives. It was done to keep their; minds 
ofl mischievous thoughts. Even Sarkis Kilikian, stretched on 
his back, and full of the joy of drifting tobacco-smoke, seemed 
to have nothing against the prevaihng order. To be sur^ 
Hrand Oskanian was a non-smoker. 

On the thirty-fourth day of exile, twenty-foiu: hours after 
Krikor’s death, there were about two hundred sick people in 
the fever-wood, and more than a hundred others in and around 
the hospital-hut. Mostly, apart from the seriously wounded, 
ihcy were cases of sheer enfceblement, people who had broken 
down at work or about the camp. In a population of five 
thousand this was not an alarming proportion of sick, includ- 
ing, as It did, wounded men. But on that day, for no obvious 
reason, the curve of mortality shot upwards wildly. By eve- 
ning forty-three hves were extinguished, and it looked as 
though, in the course of the next few hours, many others 
would follow them The graveyard had long been too small to 
take in all these new inhabitants. 

Ter Haigasun therefore introduced a new kind of burial, 
without first having described it to the people. Late in the 
moonless night they collected the bodies and carried them up 
to the Dish Terrace, which jutted out to sea like the long 
prow of a ship Everyone had to take a hand, hospital attend- 
ants, the churchyard folk, and anyone else whose work in the 
camp was done at night. The ground had to be covered two 
or three times, before all these dead, tied into their shrouds, 
had been laid out in rows on the bare rock. 

Since the new moon the weather had changed. There was 
no rain yet, but wind, in angry rebellious gusts, swept across 
the hillocks of Musa Dagh; sometimes a strangling wind from 
the steppes, sometimes a foamy sirocco from the sea, which 
veered and veered, as though to fool the staider elements, 
water and earth. Had Gabriel not placed his Town Enclosure 
so skilfully in a hollow of the ground, not a single hut Would 
have been left standing. Here, on the exposed Dish Terrace, 

680 



the wind seemed to have built its eyrie. When it leapt in 
sudden gusts upon these rocks, people found it hard to keep 
on their feet. The torches and church tapers held by the 
mourners were blown out by its first assault. Only the silver 
thurible snll plowed faintly as the deacon held it up to the 
priest. Ter Haigasun passed, blessing, in tiny steps, from 
corpse to corpse. This method of burial scandahzed Nunik, 
Wartuk, Manushak, but, since they were on the Damlayik 
only by sufferance, they did not criticize. Two men lifted the 
first corpse by its feet and shoulders and bore it along to the 
narrow part of the ledge. There stood a giant with his legs 
straddled, unshaken by these buffeting gusts, with hands like 
two big, outspread lettuces, lifted in readiness. It was Kevork, 
the sunflower dancer, the half-wit. It had not been easy to 
make him understand his office. At last he had realized what 
was wanted and nodded with a broad grin. “Oh, yes — ^just 
what they do on ships!” So that then they learned, for the first 
time, that as a boy Kevork had sailed on a coaler in the Black 
Sea. The half-wit was by nature full of zeal, and nothing gave 
him greater satisfaction than a chance to make himself useful. 

Kevork would not allow anyone else to rob him of even the 
smallest part of his dignity. He received the corpse, and, with 
a shove of his elbows, edged away the two other men who 
wanted to help him. The sea seemed still to keep some star- 
trace of former nights of perfect calm. Its white crests pre- 
sented a reflected semblance of light, enough to outline the 
dancer as he worked A few lanterns marked the threatening 
rock-edge. But, in spite of them, it was cruelly dangerous work 
for Kevork. For the Dish Terrace stood on what was known 
as the “Fligh Wall,” which fell sheer for over twelve hundred 
feet into the sea. The sea had eaten its way so deep into the 
foot of the High Wall, that this rock-plateau really looked 
like a dish, held out in space on a hand, and, from above, 
the surf could not be seen. A false step on this gigantic prow 
would have been the quickest, surest deoth Yet now, when 

68i 



night was at its darkest, the dancer showed no trace of fear, 
no giddiness, though all the others drew quickly badt. 
on this narrow, faintly illuminated ledge, was redly dancing, 
ro cking hims elf and the dead, like a powerful nurse. The 
corpses sank noiseless and invisible, into night. Kevork, in 
spite of the pitiful rations he had now been drawing for many 
days, had not lost any of his strength. When, after about an 
hour, rhythmically, on straddling legs, he had lightly heaved 
his forty-third body into etermty, he seemed downcast at the 
sight of his empty hands. He would have liked to cradle four 
hundred, a thousand, the whole people, and rock them asleep. 
An outsider might have been astonished to see how httle 
horror there was in this burial, how much of beauty, indeed, 
there was in it. 

Unexpectedly the swimmers got back from Alexandretta. Early 
one morning these two young men turned up in the north' 
trenches, having slipped in safely past the extended lines of 
saptichs and soldiers, which for the last few days had sur- 
rounded all the heights of Musa Dagh from Kebussiye to the 
coast village Arsus in the north. The physical condition of 
these swimmers in no sense suggested the tods and perils of 
their ten days’ adventure. They were thin as skeletons, but 
wiry, swaggering skeletons, tanned with sun and the salt air. 
Strangest of all were their clothes. One was wearing a shabby 
but one-time elegant gentleman’s dressing-gown made of 
brown wool; the other, white flannel trousers, and with them 
the wreck of a dinner jacket from the dim antiquity of that 
garment’s style. They both had heavy sacks full of hard army 
biscuits on their shoulders, an act of heroism on the people’s 
behalf when one remembers the thirty-five mdes of mnnnrain 
country between Alexandretta and the Damlayik. 

Their return caused jubilauon among the villagers, but the 
news they brought was such as to extingmsh all hope. They 
had stayed sue days in Alexandretta wi^out seeing the sign 

682 



of any war^p in the outer harbour. A few battered Turkish 
tin-tt^s were riding at anchor there, and coal-barges, fishing- 
smacks, and a Russian merchantman interned by the war. But 
the whole vast bay, which forms the deep snug angle between 
Asia Minor and Asia, lay empty, as empty as the coastline be- 
hind Musa Dagh. 

For many months no one in Alexandretta had seen even the 
shadow of a warship far out at sea. 

All this they related confusedly. Each jealously strove not 
to let the other go on speaking. They described their whole 
excursion day by day, every detail of it. If one forgot some 
trifle, the other at once became impatient. But the crowd, for- 
getting its own situation, could never have enough minute 
description. 

In the first day after they had set out, they had kept to the 
summit of the mountains, skirted Ras el-Khanzir, and so come 
unperceived to the road that leads along the coast from Arsus 
to the port. Then they had spent a whole day on a bill close to 
Alexandretta, where, safely hidden in myrtle thickets, they 
kept a sharp look-out on the front harbour. At about four 
that afternoon, a narrow grey streak, far out at sea, turned 
coastwards, with a hne of foam in its wake. The swimmers, 
forgettmg all precautions, had dashed down to the sea, plunged 
in and swum out, past the wooden jetty, into the open har- 
bour. As their orders instructed them, they swam on closer 
and closer, in wide circles, in the direction of this supposed 
French or English torpedo-boat, which quickly grew plainer 
before their eyes, till soon, to their horror, they had perceived 
that the half-moon flag flew on its deck. But the men on deck 
had sighted the swimmers. Piercing shouts! And, when these 
remained unanswered, the crew of this customs-inspection ves- 
sel, as now the slip turned out to be, commanded by the Turk- 
ish harbourmaster of Alexandretta, had peppered them with 
a dozen small shot. 

They dived and swam on under water, experts as they were, 

683 



a very long way. Later they hid among the cyclopean rocks on 
which the jetty itself is built. Luckily it was already evening 
and the harbour deserted. Nevertheless, high over their heads, 
they could hear the heavy thud of sentries’ feet on the rotten 
planks of the bridge. There they had sat, naked and wet. Their 
clothes, their supplies, were lost. To make it worse, some near, 
intermittent light kept picking them out, at about half-minute 
intervals. They made themselves as small as they could. Not 
till well after midnight did they manage, giving the long port- 
road a very wide berth, to get back to land. There seemed now 
no choice, save between perishing wretchedly in the hills and 
venturing boldly on into the town. But they found a third 
way. On a parklike hill, just outside it, planted with eucalyptus 
to keep off malaria, stood several big and opulent villas. The 
swimmers, judging by all they had heard of Alexandretta, felt 
convinced that one of these villas must surely be owned by an 
Armenian. And the name-plate on the first garden gate (they 
could read its inscription by moonlight) confirmed their 
hope. 

But the house was dead; no hght, and the shutters nailed. 
The swimmers were not to be put off. They would have 
broken m to get shelter. They found a spade and a hoe left 
leaning against the garden wall. With desperate strokes they 
began to try to force the door without thinking that the din 
they made might equally well arouse an enemy. In a few 
minutes a chain rattled inside. The door was pulled open. A 
shaky light and a trembling man. “Who'’” — ^“Armenians For 
Christ’s sake give us something to eat and hide us. We’ve 
come from the sea. We’re naked.” The circle of light from the 
trembling man’s electric torch eddied across their shivering 
bodies. “Merciful God’ I can’t let you come in here. We should 
all be done for. But wait!” Minutes dragged by. Then, through 
the half-open door, two shirts and two rugs were handed out 
to them. In addition to which they were given copious bread 
and cold meat and two pound-notes each. But their panicked 

684 



compatrbt still kept whispering: “In the Saviour’s name don’t 
stay here. They may have seen you, even now. Go to the 
German vice^nsul. He^s the only one who can help you. His 
name is Herr Hoffmann. I’ll send an old woman to show you 
the way, a Turk. Follow her. But not too close! And don’t 
talk!" 

Luckily Herr Hoffmann lived in the same parkhke neigh- 
bourhood. This German vice-consul turned out to be very 
well disposed. He had done already more than he strictly 
should have done, or could do, to help the Armemans m this 
district. Hoffmann had most kindly taken them in, fed them, 
given them a room, with two splendid beds in it, and fabulous 
meals, three times a day. He had offered to let them stay on in 
this magic sanctuary till things were normal again. Yet, on the 
third day of this life of ease, the swimmers had told him that 
they felt it was time to hurry back to Musa Dagh, to their 
own people It so happened, by a curious stroke of fate, that 
Rossler, the consul-general, had come on a visit to Aleppo on 
the very day they informed the kind Herr Hoffmann of their 
decision. Rossler had advised the two young swimmers to be 
thankful they had managed to save their skins, warning them 
on no account to leave this safety and protection. These 
thoughts of a rescuing gunboat were the mere crazy fantasies 
of people whose troubles had unhinged their minds. First, 
there were no French warships of any description in the 
North-East Mediterranean. Tru^ there was an English fleet 
stationed in Cyprus harbour, but, since its business was to 
guard the Suez canal and Egypt, it never strayed into the 
north. Why should it ^ There was no chance of landing troops 
on the coasts of Syria. Secondly, Herr Rossler had pointed 
out to them, it was a piece of most exceptional good luck for 
Armenian refugees to be taken into a consul’s house. And real 
help was out of the question. Neither he, Rossler, nor his 
American colleague in Aleppo, Mr. Jackson, was able to offer 
it. But, he added, with obvious satisfaction, a few days ago 

685 



Jackson had managed to shelter a young Armenian, who dso 
came from the camp on Musa Dagh. The swimmers had re- 
joiced that Haik was safe. 

They had thanked Herr Rossler and Herr Hoffmann, but 
would answer further suggestbns, indeed prayers, only with 
the curt embarrassment with which young men express such 
emotions. “We have our fathers and mothers up there . . . 
and our girls as well. . . . We couldn’t stand it ... if any- 
thing were to happen up there and we were here . . . ahvc 
... in this beautiful house.” 

So on September 2 Vice-Consul Hoffmann had let them go 
again. They had told him of the lack of bread on the Damla- 
yik, and he, though not by strictly official methods, had ob- 
tained two sacks of army biscuits from the Imperial Ottoman 
Commissariat, which he gave them as a parting gift. But the 
best thing he did was to take them in his consular yayli. The 
swimmers were put to sit on either side of him. On the box 
beside the coachman in his lambskin kepi, sat a resplendently 
uniformed khavass, who kept slowly waving a small German 
flag. Proudly they drove on past saptieh guardhouses. The 
gendarmes jerked to attention, with respectful salutes for the 
representative of Germany, his flag, and his two doubtful 
proteges Herr Hoffmann had even taken them further, past 
the second guardhouse outside Arsus. There the two swim- 
mers had got out and, weeping in spite of all their efforts, 
said good-bye to their warm-hearted protector. 

Someone had fetched the widow Shushik from her hut. 
She was told that Haik was safe. First she seemed quite un- 
able to grasp the fact. She croudied on the ground, bending 
forwards, dully. Since Stephan’s death she had scarcely once 
raised her eyes. She looked more bony than ever. But now 
her hard, male fists hung limp at her sides. Now she only 
went from time to time to draw her ration at the distributing- 
tables. If anyone ventured to say a word to her, Shushik re- 
plied more brusquely than ever before. She was full of hare. 

6 % 



Now, as she sat hunched up, she could hear them whispering 
behind her. ' 

“Shushik! Listen, can’t youl Haik’s ahve. . . . Haik’s alive.” 

It took a very long time before their whispers reached her 
mind, before her hunched and angry back relaxed gradually, 
became feminine. One of the swimmers completed this soften- 
ing process: he embroidered his tale — a successful traveller. 

“Rossler and Jackson see each other every day. The German 
himself told me how he’d seen Haik. He said he was looking 
fine!” 

Then, at last, certainty could penetrate the remotest corner 
of Shushik’s mind. Two long breaths, like groans. She stum- 
bled a few steps nearer the rest. And these steps led Haik’s 
mother out of a solitude which had lasted fifteen years, into 
the wide circle gathered round the swimmers and their fam- 
ilies. One more tottering step and she lay full length, but at 
once propped herself up on to her knees. Into the colourless, 
ageless face of this giantess there came, like an astonishing 
revelation, like sudden sunlight, an inexpressible love of 
humankind. The standoffish Shushik, she who had kept her- 
self to herself, raised heavy arms in the weakest supplication. 
Shushik’s arms besought: Take me in, let me share this with 
youl Because I belong to you now. . . . 

She had still not been thrust out of her shadow. As a rule she 
could only see moving blurs. If she made an cBort, they came 
together and formed shapes. But she was far too clever to 
make efforts. Words and sounds beat in her ears, as hollow as 
though she lay in a padded room. So that, really, there she 
was, in the telephone-box at the lower end of the Champs 
Hys&s, calhng up the Armenian Club ^or Gabriel, because 
there was a new comedy at the Trocaduo, which she wanted 
to see. But, when these cool uncertainties grew less vague, when 
they even threatened to take on solid form, she grew nervous 
and escaped at once. The one sense she could still trust and 

687 



uiDjoy was not only normal, but highly developed: her sense 
of smell. She sniffed whole worlds into herself. Worlds which 
committed her to nothing. Banks of violets, early scents of 
spring m little villa gardens in Northern France, where col- 
oured glass balls mirror the roadway. Only, in Heaven’s name, 
no roscsl She could sniff that pecuhar odour composed of sun- 
dust, of midday bustle, gasolene, stale incense, and cellar-damp, 
which assails our nostrils as we open the little wooden side- 
doors which will lead us on inside the cathedral. To confess 
oneself again — and receive holy communion' But is it really 
necessary to confess oneself, of something one has never really 
committed, something which was probably part of one’s ill- 
ness? Then again — ^that horrible, all-pervasive scent of myrtle 
bushes. At least not that, Jhusl Mane! The myrtle bushes can 
be effaced by a very strong counter-irritant — washing one’s 
hair. So then she sat chez Fauchardih-e, Rue Madame 12, m 
the close, steamy warmth of her compartment, wrapped all in 
white, leaning well back in the swivel-chair. . . . Not scent 
this time, only the clean and rustic smell of camomile. (Peas- 
ant women, going to mass on Sunday ) Juliette’s head was 
foaming with a cloud of camomile. And her hair was quite 
smooth now, skimpy, plaited, like a leggy schoolgirl’s. But 
already the warm, foamy camomile surged up all over this 
juvenile blond head and ruffled it out into a woman’s. Sensi- 
tive fingers began to work on it. A white coolness laid itself 
on Juliette’s forehead, on her cheeks and chin. Soon she’d be 
twenty-four; at certain hours the skin round her eyes and 
mouth had a tired look. It ought to be evening all day long, 
and the sun turned into electric light. Oh, how nice to be able 
to be in love with oneself again! Not to live for others' To be 
really absorbed in one’s own perfectly cared-for body, full of 
delight m its charms, armed by it against all self-mistrust, as 
though there were no such things as men. . . . 

Yet, in spite of her wandering mind, Juliette could still 
keep a sharp eye on much that occurred in the present. (Even 

688 



in her deepest unconsciousness, she had never lost her physical 
shame and cleanliness.) Now she coidd see plainly all the 
trouble Mamk Antaram was taking to get her well again. She 
heard how the doctor’s wife and Iskuhi discussed the food 
which must be prepared for her. In spite of the dimness of her 
thoughts she still felt surprised that searching hands should 
always manage to find in the store chest a handful of fine 
ground nee, a packet of Quaker Oats, a bar of chocolate. 
Surely all that had been used up long ago' She tried to count 
all the people who lived on it. Stephan. Yes, and because of 
Stephan they ought to be very carrful indeed. Then Gabriel, 
Avakian, Iskuhi, the Tomasians, Knstaphor, Missak, Hovsan- 
nah, and — and . . . She couldn’t at first think of the name. 
Her brain became muzzy again at once, her head swam and 
sang. Nor could she count, and her sense of time was all out 
of gear. Before, after, the things that had just been happening 
— those that had happened long ago; it was all a )umble. 

She lay alone. Mairik Antaram had had to leave her for a 
couple of hours to go to the hospital-hut. Then Iskuhi came 
into the tent and sat down opposite the bed in her usual seat, 
hiding her lame arm, as her habit was, with her shawl. Juliette, 
through eyelids grown transparent, saw that Iskuhi fully be- 
lieved her to be asleep and so had ceased to control her 
thoughts and expression But she knew even more. Gabriel 
had just left Iskuhi, and that, Juliette knew, was why this girl 
had come into her tent. And here Iskuhi would sit till he came 
back' Also she could see how Iskuhi’s face, although it was 
no more than a hovering light, reproached her bitterly. Bitter 
reproaches for having let slip her chance to die. And this 
spiteful, this hatefully pretty, thing was really quite right. 
Since how much longer would Juliette be permitted to stay 
on, in her irresponsible border-kingdom ? How much longer 
would they let her sleep and say nothing whenever Gabriel 
was about? Juliette felt — ^like strong rays beating on her face 
— this reproach, this blame, the enmity, m Iskuhi. 

689 



Juliette had always imagined herself hard, and the Asiatic 
soft and yielding. Yet the hard had been dissolved by the soft. 
As she lay there, seeming to be asleep, she was overtaken by 
sharp perceptions. How was this.^ Not she, Juliette, had first 
claim on Gabriel. Iskuhi had an older, prior claim, and no one 
had any right to contest it if she took her own back. A great 
self-pity shook Juliette. Had she not done everything in her 
power to win the love of this Asiauc, she who stood so im- 
measurably above her ^ Had she not formed that ignorant chit 
of a girl, dressed her up in all her own things, taught her how 
to care for her face and hands? (Oh, yes, and when she’s 
stripped, that young woman, m spite of her pretty little breasts, 
has a grey-brown skin, and not even God could alter that &)r 
her. And a crippled left arm. Surely — such a fastidious man 
as Gabriel ....?) Juliette was astonished to consider how, 
ever since she remembered life again, this arch-enemy, in 
spite of her continued vomiting, had kept coming back solic- 
itously to the bed with a spoon and a cup. Why, she might 
have poisoned the cup — she ought to have poisoned it; it had 
been her plain duty, so to do. Juliette blinked her thin eye- 
lids. Et, votlal Iskuhi had stood up; had, as she always did, 
stuck m the thermos under her left armpit; was unscrewing 
the top. This she put down on the little dressing-table, care- 
fully HUed It, came towards the patient. So it had been more 
than empty suspicion, then* The murderess was coming with 
her poisoni Juuette pressed together her eyes and lips. And 
heard how the murderess, in the act, could still manage to 
sing, in her glassy voice, or at least hum softly. She sang like 
one of the mosquitoes which kept settling on Juliette’s face. 
She hstened intently. 

Iskuhi bent down over her. “You’ve had nothing to drink 
for five hours, Juliette. This tea is still quite warm.” 

The patient opened glowering eyes. Iskuhi noticed noth- 
ing. She had put down- her poison-bowl again and thrust an 
extra cushion under Juliette’s head, to prop her up. Only then 

690 



did she set her draught to Juliette’s lips. Juliette waited, to dis- 
arm her arch-enemy’s suspiaons, pretending that she really 
was going to drink. Suddenly, widi well-calculated cunmng, 
she knocked the cup out of Iskuhi’s hand. The tea spilt over 
the rugs. 

But Juhette had sat up in bed and was panting: “Gol Get 
out, you! Go awayl . . .” 

She had far worse to encounter early that evening, when 
Gabriel came beside her bed. Now it was a case of escaping 
quickly, diving back swiftly into the labyrinth. But suddenly 
^osc dark paths were blocked, and the whole area of the 
borderland had become most absurdly constricted. Gabriel, as 
usual, took up her hand inquiringly. A fully conscious thud 
of her heart: Will he speak? Shall I have to be told every- 
thing today, and l^now? Mayn’t I hide any more? She tried 
to breathe heavily, evenly. But she could feel at once that this 
time her sleep would not be limpid and ]U$t, but troubled by 
the will. Gabriel, too, said not a word. In a little while he ht 
the candles on the dressing-table — oil was no longer beiifg 
used— and went away. Juliette breathed freely again. But in 
two minutes he was back with that big photograph of Ste- 
phan which he placed on her bed. It was the photograph done 
last year, which usually he kept on his writing-desk in Paris; 
also in Yoghonoluk. 

But that isn’t Stephan’s photo at all, Juliette thought, it’s 
something else, a letter perhaps, and, when I’m well, I can 
read it. But now I mustn’t expose myself any longer to life. 
So bad for me! I really have still got a perfect right to vanish. 
She nestled down, and, with ice-cold hands, drew up the rugs 
to her mouth. But that threw the cardboard off the bed, with 
its picture side uppermost. The photo locked straight up at 
Juliette, whose head bent out over the bed. The candlelight, 
reflected in the glass, shone on the centre of that flat image. 
Now it was done. Now there was no more going back for 
Juliette. But Stephan’s visit was not any result of the photo- 

691 



graph. The boy's essential reality was standing behind Juli- 
ette’s bed. It was as if he had dashed in, out of breath, from 
among all the others, the Haik gang, or from orderly duty, or 
a game, bursting in quickly, much against his will, to gulp 
down milk. 

“Maman, were you looking for me?” 

“Don’t come yet, not today, Stephan I’’ implored Juliette. 
“Not today, please. I’m not strong enough. Come tomorrow! 
Let me be ill just another day! You’d better go along to your 
father ’’ 

“I’m always with him ^’’ 

“I know you don’t love me, Stephan . . .’’ 

“And you, Maman.?’’ 

“When you’re a good boy, I love you You must wear your 
blue suit again. Because, otherwise, you’re so Armenian. . . .’’ 

Stephan was very annoyed by this. He seemed not in the 
least to want to go back to his other clothes. His silence showed 
her he was defiant. But Juliette kept on begging in an ever 
stormier voice: “Please, not today, Stephan' Come early to- 
morrow' Leave me this one night . . .’’ 

“Early tomorrow?” 

It was an empty question, not a promise, impatient, absent, 
hasty, with Stephan’s head half turned back, towards his 
mother. Yet, even as Juliette felt her petition granted, she 
sprang out of bed. Her voice rasped and came out strangled: 
“Stephan' Stay here — don’t run away — here' Stay! Ste- 
phan! . . .” 

Mairik Antaram was on her way to Three-Tent Square to 
settle down her patient for the night. Shushik had joined her. 
For, since she heard her Haik was still alive, the widow had 
been shyly eager for company, and people to help. And who 
better than Antaram, the helper, could show her a way to 
this ? These two women found the hanum lying out about two 
hundred paces in front of her tent. She cowered there in her 
night-dress, by the side of a bush, her shrivelled legs drawn 

692 



up to her chin. Sweat still stood out on her forehead, but her 
open eyes were again vacantly remote. 

Axes could be heard on the North Saddle from the distant, 
northern heights of Musa Dagh. The Turks were felling the 
ilexes of the mountain. Were they budding gun-emplace- 
ments i* Or setting up a fortified camp to have a point of re- 
treat for their next attack; not, as previously, to be forced to 
leave the heights when it was dark, or else be exposed to 
sudden onslaughts. Scouts were sent out to investigate these 
crests of hill beyond the Saddle; four of the quickest boys in 
the scouts’ group. They never came back. 

Profound commotion' Sato, the master-spy, was sent forth. 
No harm came to her. And she came back. But nothing use- 
ful could be got out of her. “Many thousands of soldiers.” 
Sato’s notion of figures had always been most vague; either 
they were the lowest or the highest. As to what these “thou- 
sands” were doing, she could only give the mistiest report. 
“They’re rolling wood,” or “They’re cooking.” The duty 
seemed not to have interested her. 

This happened on the thirty-sixth day in camp, the fourth 
of September. That morning every family had been served 
with Its exact portion of donkey-flesh. No one knew that the 
ration might not be the last. At the same time all the ob- 
servers sent in reports that the villages and the whole of the 
valley were stirring as never before. 

And not only were there crowds of new soldiers and sap- 
tiehs, but swarms of inquismve rabble had collected again 
from the Moslem villages. The cause of this tumult was soon 
apparent. When, armed with Gabriel’s field-glass, Samuel 
Avakian climbed the high knoll to cleai up the posmon, 
scouts came dashing in to him excitedly. Something entirely 
new had arrived Most of the villagers had seen nothing like 
it before in their lives. It had just halted on the highroad from 
Antakiya to Suedia, at the entrance to the hamlet Yedidje, 

693 



where a small detachment of cavalry were awaiting it. Avak- 
ian tltrough his field-glass recognized a tiny, grey, military 
car, which must have risked its life m crossing the passes at 
Ain el Yerab. Three officers climbed out of the car and 
mounted horses, held there ready for them. This miniature 
cavalcade turned straight into the valley of the villages. The 
officers cantered on ahead; behind them, the cavalrymen; a 
few minutes more and they’d be in Wakef. The officer riding 
In the centre kept almost half a length ahead of the other two. 
The others wore the usual astrakhan kepi; he had on a field- 
grey service cap. Avakian could plainly observe the general’s 
red stripe on his riding-breeches. The riders cantered all 
through the villages without one halt. 

It took them scarcely an hour to reach Yoghonoluk. There, 
on the church square, some civilians were already awaiting 
them; no doubt the Kaimakam of Antakiya who, with the 
mudir and other civil servants, escorted the general pasha 
and his suite into Villa Bagradian. These very significant 
events were at once reported to the commander. Samuel Avak- 
ian sounded the major alarm on his own responsibility. Gabriel 
later endorsed this measure. He reinforced it, indeed, by giv- 
ing orders that from now on the camp was to consider itself 
as being in a perpetual state of alarm, whether anything hap- 
pened or not. But to Avakian he confided his opinion that the 
Turks were not ready yet by a long chalk, that neither today 
nor tomorrow would anything happen, and probably not in 
the next few days. He seemed to be right. Having spent two 
hours in the villa, these new officers remounted and cantered 
to Ycdidje, even more sharply than they had come. They had 
not been half a day on the scene of action when the little, 
cheaply rattling car drove off again towards Antakiya. The 
Kaimakam accompanied these military gentlemen back to his 
provincial capital. 

That same day Gabriel roused himself and shook off his 
pain. The soldier aroused m him by the banishment laws got 

694 



tlie upper liand again. From hour to hour he managed to 
extinguish his inner hfe. Pain was still there, but only in the 
form of some dun consciousness, hke a wounded hmb dead- 
ened with mjections. He flung himself on his work with wild 
eagerness. Sudden reseflution seemed to have worked a com- 
plete cure, so that now he stood more firmly erect than ever. 
Only now did he become fully aware what invaluable help he 
got from Avakian, his adjutant^ or better, his chief-of-staif. 
That indefatigable tutor, that strangely impersonal ego, who 
never once — though in knowledge and intelligence he stood 
head and shoulders above most of the leaders— had appeared 
to lay any claims to leadership, had put forth iron strength. 
When Avakian appeared in the trenches, he spread that feel- 
ing of almost joyous zeal, that preaous “morale,” which is 
really complete trust in the leadership. It was because, even 
when there was no commander, the adjutant could reflect Ba- 
gradian’s qualities, like light. And Avakian, too, since Ste- 
phan’s death, had had little sleep. He had lived four years 
with the Bagradians and had loved Stephan like his young 
brother. Why, on that horrible day, had he not guessed what 
was going on in Stephan’s mind? He would never forgive 
himself. Never ? Alas, it was his only comfort that this “never” 
was only a matter of a few days, and that so everything — 
everything — ^weighed lighter. Avakian set himself to serve Ga- 
briel. Among other things he had drawn up a new roster of 
the decads. From it Bagradian found that his fighters had 
diminished to seven hundred or so. But this great gap left 
by death did not connote any essential weakening of their 
fighting strength. The best reservists could be armed with the 
rifles of these dead. And then, thanks to the forest fire, the 
area of defence had shrunk to a few sections. The ilex gully 
was still an oven of glowing coals. Their heat could be felt in 
the Town Enclosure as much as ever, where, usually towards 
evening, it spoilt people’s tempers. So that the weakest pari 
of the line was now protected for ever against attack. And not 

695 



only in this great sector of the Damlayik, but far around, on 
the lower slopes, ridges, and hillocks, caved-in tree-trunks still 
glowed. Here a compassionate hand had turned it all in favour 
of the Armenians. Gabriel finally disbanded the garrisons of 
sections, grown superfluous, and in place of them formed a 
strong chain of outposts, to protect the mountain from surprise 
attacks and Turkish spies. Judging by present signs and possi- 
bilities, the Turks were intending a massed assault in the 
north, probably supported by artillery, with a force that should 
ten times outnumber and wipe out the exhausted Armenians. 
Their axes rang all day on the Damlayik. But, in spite of these 
apparent preparations, Gabriel was far-sighted enough to send 
out spies in the southern areas. These brave young men 
ventured out at night as far as Suedia. They reported that 
only very few soldiers, and scarcely any saptiehs, were in the 
Orontes plain. All the troops were concentrated in the villages. 
The rock bastion with all its possibilities of an avalanche, 
seemed still, in spite of this new general, to inspire the Turks 
with insurmountable respect. None the less Gabriel decided 
to inspect the South Bastion next morning. 

That evening he sat in his slceping-placc and stared up the 
slope of the Saddle across to the group of trees on the crest, 
between which Stephan had gone his way without his being 
able to prevent it. His neighbours in the trench still kept their 
distance. When he arrived, their talk suddenly stopped; they 
stood up and greeted him as the leader. And that was all. 
Not one of them said a word to him of Stephan They may not 
have dared. They all eyed him so strangely — ^inquiring, discon- 
solate. For twenty-four hours he had seen neither Juliette nor 
Iskuhi It was better not to. All ties were loosening He must 
not let himself be cast back into weakness He must be cold 
and free for the last fight. And, indeed, for all his im- 
measurable grief, he did feel cold and free. Here on this 
mountam summit even September evenings were chilly Nor 
had the veering wind died down, though here and there it 

696 



paiued in ks dance. Where were those peaceful moony nights 
when the forty wounds in Stephan's body had still not seared 
his father’s mind? Gabriel stared on, out at the black wall 
opposite. Sometimes the wind mourned in the trees above. 
How timid their enemies were! On a night like this they could 
easily have dug themselves in along that slope without being 
prevented. Ah, well, they had no need of such arts, since they 
had artillery. That, in a hand’s turn, would bring the end. 
Perhaps one ought not to be waiting for it, one ought to an- 
ticipate the attack, get a fresh idea. Had not he, Bagradian, 
always had the saving idea, so that here they still remained, 
unbroken^ First, it had been the whole defence system, the 
completed plan of these entrenchments, then the komitajis, the 
mobile guard, the forest-fire, to save them again. . . . Antici- 
pate! A new inspiration! But what? How? His mind was a 
blank. 

Next day Gabriel visited the South Bastion as he had in- 
tended. But first he stopped to examine the howitzers. Their 
barrels were trained in opposite directions, the one on to the 
northern heights, the other on Suedia. Gabriel, in the days 
before Stephan’s death, had set their direction by his map. 
It would at least be possible to hold up and disturb the Turks’ 
advance. In the lockers there were still four shrapnel and 
fifteen grenades. The guns had a guard of eight men round 
them, trained by Nurhan, under his directions. 

Nurhan, Avakian, and several decad commanders accom- 
panied Gabriel on his surprise inspection. Their first impres- 
sions on reaching the South Basbon were not such as to arouse 
instant suspicion. Sarkis Kilikian, on release, had even con- 
sented to improve still further the machinery of his battering- 
rams. The powerful battering-shields had been enlarged by 
oar-shaped slats jutting over the wheel-edge. So that now the 
impact of the shield could take in a much wider surface of the 
loose-heaped stones. The shields themselves had been doubly 

697 



strengtheoed and clamped together with many strong iron 
hoops. Judging by the look of them, these squat catapults 
would he capable of hurling tons of stone down the slope as 
far as the ruins of Selcucia. Kihkian seemed interested in 
nothing else but these sinister toys. It was a boyish trait, this 
sudden fit of obstinate concentration, with which he kept on 
working at “wall-breakers.” This zeal was in signal contrast 
to the usual bleak emptiness of the man. But, from the first 
instant he set eyes on him, Gabriel had sensed some eager, 
subterranean well-spring m this victim of relentless fate. His 
relationship with Kilikian was full of inexplicable tensions. 
Something in the prosperous “Parisicn,” the cultivated bour- 
geois, was afraid of the radical denials, the void, within this 
desertei. They had only once been directly in conflict, when 
Kilikian was routed with ignominy. Yet, even on that occasion, 
Gabriel, the victor, had fdt uneasy, and today he could still 
not feel entirely assured. Kilikian was the one man on Musa 
Dagh with whom the chief never could manage to strike the 
right note. Either he spoke to him too negligently, or made 
him too much of an equal. But the Russian could always find 
a method of keeping Bagradian at arm’s length. That, for 
instance, he should still he qmetly on his back while the chief 
for the second time praised his catapults— it wa.< not oiii}' 
insolent, it was subversive insubordination, and ought to have 
brought down instant punishment Gabriel did not punish; he 
turned away to look about for Teacher Oskanian. But when 
Gabriel had been seen approaching, Oskanian, in hysterical 
panic, had made himself scarce. He was unaware that neither 
Ter Haigasun, Bedros Hckim, nor Shatakhian had told 
Gabriel of that sorry Council meeting, at which the teacher 
had spat out so much venom against Bagradian’s family. To 
have been turned off the Council of Leaders had put an edge 
on Oskanian’s vanity Apparently he was now intriguing to 
found an “Oskanian party.” For days he had blown ofl steam 
to all and sundry, to simple-minded folk who did not belong 

608 



to the South Basuon but came there to visit him. “The idea," 
as he called it, took clearer and clearer shape in his mind. 
But this idea was not an original inspiration; it dated from a 
luminous dissertation of Knkor’s, who years ago, on one of 
their philosophical walks, had discussed the thesis “the duty 
of living” and "the right to die,” supported with sundry quo- 
tations from a number of high-sounding authorities, whose 
opinions he set one against the other. 

In the trenches of the South Bastion the inspecting party 
discovered no flagrant infringements. The duty-routine as 
laid down for the dccads was being followed, the posts had 
sentries, the advance-pickets were placed at the edge of the 
wide stone slope. Rifles left nothing to be desired. And yet, 
for all Its surface order, these men’s manner had in it some- 
thmg indeflnite, slack, suspicious, which roused all Nurhan’s 
ire. This garrison was made up of eleven decads. About 
eighty-five of the men were deserters. Not all of these fellows 
were doubtful quantities; on the contrary, the majority were 
quite harmless fugitives from barracks, who had escaped from 
a bullying sergeant, the basunado, or enrolment in a labour 
battalion. But, whoever was at fault in the matter, whether it 
were due to want, depravity, or bad example — they had one 
and all taken on Kilikian’s intractable apathy, as though that 
were the only way of approaching life for such men as they. 
They lounged, they loitered, they lay about insolently on their 
backs, they stretched and lolled, they growled and whistled 
provocatively, in a way which boded no good for the coming 
battle. These men might not have been a fighting garrison, 
not even indeed an authentic gang of brigands, but a mere 
horde of dissipated, disgrunded tramps clustered together in 
the wilderness. But Gabriel did not seem to take their be- 
haviour too seriously. Most of these men had proved them- 
selves fighters. Everything else was beside the point. They 
must be more carefully handled than the 6ltte. 

But one piece of carelessness was too much for him. The 

699 



bonfire! On the west flanks o£ the South Bastion, where the 
Damlayik curves off seawards, three high redoubts had been 
thrown up as flank-protection. These redoubts dominated the 
whole steep descent at that side of the mountain which ebbed 
away in wooded terraces towards Habaste and thus made 
every outflanking manoeuvre impossible. And here, twenty 
paces below these redoubts (also crowned by protecting walls), 
a big, cosy bonfire was flaming on the open foreground-area — 
in friendly uivitation to the Turks! It was one of the most 
stringent regulations that no open fires should be lit in the 
trenches unless they had been sancuoned by the leaders. Yet 
even this was not enough! Round this fire there squatted not 
only a ragged crew of the least desirable deserters, but two 
trollops who had moved from the Town Enclosure to this 
soaety. And these women were turning the tenderest goat’s 
flesh on long spits before the flames. Chaush Nurhan and the 
others hurled themselves in a frenzy on the group. Bagradian 
came slowly after them. Nurhan gripped one of the deserters 
by his ragged shirt and jerked him up. He was a long-haired 
lout with a brownish face and small, quick eyes, eyes which 
did not look in the least Armenian. 

Nurhan’s long grey sergeant’s moustache twitched with 
fury at him. “You louse! Where did you get that goat from ?’’ 

The long-haired deserter tried to free himself. He pretended 
not to know who Chaush Nurhan was. “What’s it to do with 
you? Who arc you anyway.?” 

“That’s who I am!” 

One crack on the jaw sent the fellow spinmng, nearly into 
the fire. He picked himself up and began to whine: “What 
did you hit me for? What harm have I ever done you? We 
went out at night to Habaste after this goat.” 

“To Habaste, you filthy pig! You found that goat in the 
camp, you poor crook. You stole thar last bite from starving 
people. . . . Now we’ve our explanation. . . 

The long-haired thief turned shifty eyes on Gabriel, who 

700 



Mood aside, leaving his subordinates to deal with this very 
uninspiring bunness. 

“E&ndi,” the deserter whined, “aren’t we human beings? 
Do we feel less hunger than anyone else? And yet you ask us 
to work; we’ve got to be on duty all day and night, worse 
than in any barracks . . .’’ 

To this Bagradian answered nothing, but signed sharply to 
his people to tread out the fire and impound the goat’s flesh. 

Chaush Nurhan menaced, waving a roasted goat’s leg: 
‘Ton’ll get hungrier yet before you’ve done. Better start eating 
each other up.’’ 

The long-haired culprit approached Bagradian, with humble 
arms crossed on his breast. “Effcndil Give us munitions! 
We’ve only got a cartridge-belt each. You’ve taken all the 
rest away from us. Then we could go out hunting and shoot 
ourselves a hare or a fox. It’s all wrong that we haven’t a few 
more cartridges. The Turks might come along any night.” 

Gabriel turned his back on him. On their way back into 
camp, Nurhan the Lion declared, still very excited: "We 
ought to clear out that whole South Bastion. Best thing would 
be to turn twenty of the worst of them out of camp!” 

But Gabriel’s thoughts had long been occupied with more 
important things than this very unpleasant little incident. 

“That’s impossible,” he said absently. “We can’t send our 
Armenian fellow-countrymen out to certain death.” 

“Armenian fellow-countrymen?” Chaush Nurhan spat far 
and scornfully. 

The face of the long-haired man came to Gabriel’s mind. 
“There must be scum, among five thousand. It’s the same 
everywhere.” 

Chaush glanced suspiciously at Gabriel. “It’s bad to let a 
crime of this sort pass.” 

Bagradian stood still; he took hold of the old sergeant’s 
Mauser rifle and stamped the butt of it hard on the ground. 
“We’ve only got one punishment, Chaush Nurhan — and this 

701 



is it. All the rest is absurd. Wasn’t it too ridiculous to shut 
Kilikian up in the government-hut, where he had poor Krikor 
to keep him company? To punish these fellows round the 
fire, we should have to shoot the lot of them.” 

“Well, that’s what we ought to have done. . . . But now we 
ought to put them into separate units, Eifendi ” 

Gabriel stopped again. “We’ll have separate units, Chaush 
Nurhan, something entirely new . . .” 

He said no more. He himself was still not sure what this 
new thing was. 

When, on the morning of September 6, the women came to 
the distributing-tablcs to receive the day’s ration for their 
families, some of them were given only bones, with a few 
stray morsels of donkey’s flesh still chnging to them. In 
desperation the mothers besieged the mukhtars, who as usual 
superintended the distribution, each at the table assigned to 
his village. These headmen stepped back before the flood, 
grey and green in the face, like their own bad consciences. 
By Council’s orders, the best meat had gone to the trenches, 
they stammered; the fighters had to get up their strength for 
the coming attack. And as for the very last shc-goats and 
donkeys, it had been decided not to slaughter them; the goats 
for their milk, which went to the smallest children; the four 
last donkeys because they would be needed in the fight. 
Nothing, therefore, remained but that mothers of families 
should begin to look about for their own provender. They 
must try to concoct some kind of herb-broth, of arbutus berries, 
acorns, Indian fig, wild berries, roots, and leaves, which at 
least should serve to deaden hunger. The mukhtars, as they 
gave this disconsolate counsel, kept bobbing and putting their 
hands in front of their faces, fully expecung that these women 
would strangle and tear them in pieces in their rage. They 
did no such thing. They hung their heads and stared at the 
nrth. The feverish restlessness in their eyes changed into that 



dazed expresaon which they had worn that day in the church 
of Yoghonoluk, when the government decree had flashed 
down hke lightning on them. The mukhtars began to breathe 
again. They had nothing to fear. The shoals of women began 
to separate. Slowly they turned their backs on the empty 
distributing-tables. 

Then, in a little while, these women dispersed in all direc- 
tions, in long, star-shaped lines about the mountain-plateau, 
went here and there among the rocks on the coastside, and 
even ventured down into such green spaces over the valley as 
fire had skirted. Their children ran with them, some not older 
than three or four, getting under their mothers’ feet and 
hindering them. If only they could have crossed the North 
Saddle as formerly, there might still have been hope of 
nutritious finds. But the area within camp-bounds had been 
cleared as bare as the plundered bone of a wild dog. Some of 
these women strayed for the hundredth time in and out among 
the arbutus and bilberry bushes to glean what still remained 
unpicked. Others among the rocks tried to climb down to 
those rare places where grew Indian figs, whose big soft 
fruit was esteemed a delicacy. What good was all that ? Then 
bellies all cried aloud for flour, for fat, for a piece of goat’s 
cheese. No blessing lay on Pastor Aram’s fishery. Without 
the necessary assistance it was impossible to construct a raft 
which would hold in the rough seas, and the nets also had 
proved useless. Nor did better luck attend the birdotchers, 
though their decoys and springs were properly made. But 
here there were no birds as yet; they were all still in the cool 
north. Quail, snipe, and woodcock would not fly into such 
childish traps. 

During these desperate expeditions of women the Council 
of Leaders held a session. The leaders were still unaware that 
this was their last day in the government-hut. The wall of 
books set up by Krikor against the world still remained un 

703 



altered Ter Haigasun’s face was a waxen death-mask. The 
priest asked Pastor Aram to speak. 

Today’s counsels, and their very unfortunate sequel, were 
predetermined by the strained feeling already arisen between 
Aram Tomasian and Gabriel. Tomasian had sull not ques- 
tioned Bagradian. He loved Iskuhi. Now that he scarcely 
ever saw her, that Hovsannah kept slandering his sister in the 
wildest outbursts, he loved her as never before. Her words 
kept ringing in his ears: “I’m nineteen, and shall never be 
twenty.” So that Tomasian tried not to bring things to a 
head. 

But this first meeting with Gabriel, whom he had not seen 
since Stephan’s death, filled Aram with a kind of bitter 
embarrassment. He could not manage to bring out a word 
of sympathy. 

The sitting opened with his report: 

"What we decided to do has been done. And now all the 
meat has been distributed. Only the very last portion was 
secretly kept back for the decads. At most it can last another 
two days. Today the women and children have their first 
complete fast d.'iy, unless we care to consider the rauons of 
the last few days as a fast.” 

Mukhtar Thomas Kebussyan raised his hand, having first 
squinted round the room to make sure that all his partisans of 
the last sitting were in their places. “I can’t sec why the men 
in the trenches should be fed, and the women and children 
left to starve. Strong, well-set-up young fellows ought to be 
able to tighten their belts a bit.” 

Here Gabriel intervened at once: “That’s very simple, 
Mukhtar Kebussyan. The fighters need their strength now, 
more than they ever did.” 

Ter Haigasun, to support their leader, switched the debate 
off food again: “Perhaps Gabriel Bagradian will give us his 
view of the real strength of the defence decads.” 

Gabriel pointed to Chaush Nurhan. “The morale of the 

704 



'decads is really not much worse than it was before the last 
iig^t. It’s surprising enough, but that’s how it is, and Chaush 
Nurhan will bear me out in what I say. And our defence 
works are far stronger now than last time. The possible points 
for a Turkish attack are far more restricted. Roughly, there’s 
only the north for them to attack m, and all their preparations 
prove what I say. In spite of this new general of theirs, they’ll 
never dare attack the bastion; that’s as good as certain. The 
garrison there, as we all know, does us no particular credit. 
But I intend sending Nurhan along there for a couple of 
days to keep them in order for a bit. This Turkish attack in 
the north will be worse than all the others put together. It’ll 
all be a question of whether they have artillery and how 
much they have. Up to now we haven’t managed to find out. 
It all depends on that. That is to say, unless we resort to some 
new method . . . but I’ll talk of that later.” 

Ter Haigasun, who had sat as usual, with chilly hands and 
downcast eyes, could not suppress the essential question: 
“Good— but what then?” 

Gabriel, consumed with longings for the end and its free- 
dom, spoke far too resonantly for the little room: “Well, only 
think! At this minute all over the world millions of men are 
hving in trenches, just as we do. They’re fighting, or else 
they’re waiting to fight, bleeding, dying, just like us. That’s 
the only thought that pacifies and consoles me. When I think 
that, I feel I’m no worse, no less honourable, than any other 
man among those millions. And it’s the same for us all! By 
fighting, we cease to be )ust manure, rotting somewhere round 
the Euphrates. By fighting we gam honour and digmty. There- 
fore, we should see nothing ahead, and think of nothing else, 
but how to fight.” 

A very small minority indeed seemed to share this heroic 
view of the situation. Ter Haigasun’s “what then ?” was going 
the rounds. 

Gabriel looked round, surprised. “What then? I thought 

705 



we’d all agreed on that. What then? We’ll hope nothing 
more.” 

Here was a chance for Asayan, the choir-singer, to do his 
friend Oskanian a service. He had promised that, in this sit- 
ting, he would let shp no chance to sow mistrust. He need 
only hint at the “treachery” of Gonzague Mans, at the Agha’s 
mysterious visit to Gabriel. 

He cleared his throat. “Effendi, a warrior’s death is not 
always quite so heroic and single-minded. Personally I wish 
nothing better. Nor do I presume to express an opinion on 
your respected wife. Perhaps you made some arrangements 
on her behalf with the Turkish pasha who visited you a few 
days ago. We know nothing of that* But what, may I ask, is to 
happen to our wives, sisters, and daughters?” 

It was in Gabriel’s nature not to be prepared for such at- 
tacks. Arrows of malice and vulgarity were more than he 
could readily contend with, mainly because he always needed a 
certain time in which to become fully conscious of them. He 
stared at Asayan, not understanding him. 

But Ter Haigasun, who knew Bagradian’s nature from A to 
Z, took up the cudgels on his behalf: “Singer, keep a guard 
on your tongue I But if you really want to know why the 
Agha Rifaat Bereket from Antakiya came here to see the 
cfEendi, I’ll tell you. Gabriel Bagradian could long since have 
been safe in the Agha’s house in Antakiya, eating his bread 
and pilav in peace and quiet, since the Turk suggested that 
he should escape and offered him a very good chance to do so. 
But our Gabriel Bagradian preferred to keep faith with us 
and go on doing his duty to the last minute.” 

This declarauon was a necessary breach of Gabriel’s con- 
fidence. A long, rather uneasy silence followed it. Apart from 
Ter Haigasun, only Bedros Altouni had known the truth. 
The silence continued. But it would be a mistake to suppose 
that it expressed any general approval of Bagradian’s act in 
refusing the Agha. The mukhtars, for instance, had no such 

706 



thoughts. Each of these worthy men “of the people” asked 
himself how he would have reacted to such a temptatioux 
And they each quietly decided that this European grandson of 
old Avetis had simply behaved hke a silly fool. Aram 
Tomasian was the first to ease the silence with his voice. 

“Gabriel Bagradian,” he began, but could not keep his eyes 
on his opponent, “feels everythmg as a mihtarist, as an o£Ecer. 
After all, no one can reproach me with having run away m 
these last fights. But I don’t feel as a militarist. Things strike 
me differently. We all sec things differently from Bagradian, 
there’s no getting away from that. Is there any object, I ask 
myself, in spilling more blood in another unequal battle 
merely in order to be left to starve quietly for three days longer 
at most? And even that would be an unheard-of bit of luck. 
What should we gain?” 

Till that instant Aram’s “way out” had still been the 
vaguest of half-digested notions, without proper reality. His 
bitter urge to contradict Bagradian suddenly gave shape to 
this nebulous project, made it seem to him like a well-thought- 
out suggestion. “Ter Haigasun and all the rest of you must 
admit that there’s no point in our holding out up here on the 
Damlayik; that we should do better to shoot our wives, and 
then ourselves, than die slowly of hunger or fall into the 
hands of the Turks. I therefore suggest that we leave the 
mountain, tomorrow or the day after, as soon as possible. As 
to the best means of doing it, that must all be carefully dis- 
cussed. I would suggest that we go northwards, though of 
course not on the heights, since those are barricaded by the 
Turks, but along the coast. We might take Ras el-Khanzir as 
our first objective. The little bay there is very sheltered and 
certainly has more fish in it than the coast here. We shan’t 
need a raft, and I give you my word that the nets will be 
enough. . . .” 

That sounded less fantastic than perhaps it was Above all, 
Aram’s speech suggested action, and the vague, but com- 

707 



peUing pro^Mct o£ being able before death to break through 
ahe mummification of the Damlayik. Heads, which up to then 
liad never moved, began to sway as though a faint wind rip- 
pled them, faint colour came into the faces. 

Only Gabriel Bagradian had not changed as now he raised 
his hand for permission to speak. “That’s a very pretty dream 
of Pastor Aram’s. I admit that I’ve had similar dreams myself. 
But we must test fantasies closely by the chances they have 
of becoming reality. I’ll therefore — though, as responsible 
leader I have no right to — assume that we succeed during the 
night in getting past the Turks, and reaching Ras el-Khanzir. 
I’ll even go much further than that; I’ll frivolously suppose 
that saptiehs and soldiers fail to notice a long, stragglmg pro=* 
cession of four to five thousand people, moving — the moon’s 
in her second quarter — all along the brightly illuminated chalk 
eliffs above the coast. Good! We reach the sloping rocks of 
the cape unhindered. There we should have to get round a 
long promontory, since the httle bay only eats into the coast 
beyond the cape. . . . Don’t interrupt me. Pastor, you can 
rely on what I say, I have every detail of the map in my head. 
I don’t know whether these bays are ]ust bare rocks or 
whether they offer any kind of inhabitable ground. But, even 
so. I’ll give the pastor the benefit of the doubt. Well, therefore, 
we find sufficient camping-ground, and the Turks arc struck 
so bhnd that they need six, or if you like eight, days to hunt 
us out. And now comes the really important question: What 
shall we have gained? Answer: We shall have exchanged the 
known for the unknown. We shall have exposed our worn-out, 
famished women and children to a long, scrambling match, 
over pitiless rocks, along the cliffs, which probably they could 
never manage. Instead of this camp, to which we’re accus- 
tomed, we should have to build up another, without strength 
and without means. Surely everyone sees that! Since we no 
longer have any mules, we’ve naturally had to leave all our 
beds and rugs, all our cooking-utensils, our tools, behind on 

708 



the Damlayik. But without tools,* even if we found oundvet 
in Paradise, with bread growing on every tree, we could never 
start a new life. The pastor won’t deny that. We relinquish 
a strong and tested fortress, for which the Turks have the 
greatest respect. We exchange a dominant position, on a 
height, for an exposed, helpless position in a valley, where 
there is no cover. We should be slaughtered within half an 
hour, Tomasian! We should of course have one great ad- 
vantage. Down there we should not have such a long way to 
fall into the sea as we shall up here, from the Dish Terrace. 
But, anyway. I’m afraid the fish may get more to eat oS us, 
than we’re ever likely to get off them.” 

Aram Tomasian had hstened to this clear expose with occa^ 
sional excited interrupdons. The voice of common sense, which 
even now warned him, at this decisive moment, not to let him- 
self be driven by bhnd emotion, grew fainter and fainter. 
Nor, as he attacked Bagradian, so hotly that he could scarcely 
control his voice, did he once look him in the face. “Gabrid 
Bagradian is always so despotic in defending his own point 
of view. He won’t allow us to have any intclhgcnce of our 
own. We’re nothing but a set of poor peasants. He’s so far 
above us! Well, I don’t deny that that’s so. We’re poor 
peasants and craftsmen, not his equals. But, since he’s just 
asked us so many questions, may I ask Aim a few in exchange? 
He, a trained officer, has made the Damlayik into a good for- 
tress. Admitted! But what use is all this fortification to us to- 
day on the Damlayik? None at all! On the contrary. It pre- 
vents our trying to find a last way of escape. If the Turks 
are intelligent, they won’t let themsdves in for another battle, 
since they can gain their object in a few days without losing 
a man. But whether or not there’s another battle — where is 
there some idea, some new attempt to escape death? I know 
it’s not nearly so much trouble to perish here, in our usual 
surroundings. At least one hasn’t got to make any effort. 
Personally I consider it despicable simply to sit down lazil) 

709 



and rot. And the most important question of all: What sug* 
gestions has Gabriel Bagradian got to make, to keep off hun- 
ger? Is It enough for him to jeer at my attempt with the 
fishery^ Unluckily it was, and remains, the only attempt. If 
I’d had support, if every able-bodied man hadn’t been always 
drilhng all day long, it might have been rather more success- 
ful.” 

And the pastor, who so far had at least kept an appearance 
of calm, sprang forward passionately and shouted: “Ter Hai- 
gasun. I’m making a very serious suggestion. That all the 
still available animals be slaughtered, cooked, and divided up. 
That we strike camp tomorrow mght, or at the very latest the 
night after. Re-encampment m one of the bays, where fishing 
is easyl” 

The quick, gruff method of this suggestion confused these 
peasants’ heavy minds. The mukhtars shifted uneasily on their 
benches, rocking from side to side, like praying Moslems. Old 
Tomasian, Aram’s father, blinked in alarm. 

But Kebussyan wiped his perspiring baldness and uttered 
a piteous complaint: “Oh, if only we’d gone on the convoy I 
. . . Alive or dead . . . we’d have done far better!” 

Here Ter Haigasun drew a crumpled filthy slip out of his 
cassock-sleeve. This was his chance, not only to stifle Kebus- 
syan’s sigh, but to defend the Damlaytk against Aram. He 
read out his fateful slip in a fairly low voice, almost tone- 
lessly: 

“ ‘Harutiun Nokhudian, Pastor of Bitias, to the Chief Priest 
of the coastal district round Suedia, Ter Haigasun of Yogho- 
noluk. 

“ ‘First, peace and long life to you, beloved brother in Christ, 
Ter Haigasun, and to all my beloved countrymen along with 
you, up on Musa Dagh, or wherever else this letter may find 
you, and, let me hope, still on the mountain. If God wills, this 
letter will reach you. I shall have given it to a well-disposed 
Turkish officer to deliver. Our trust in God has been put to 

7*0 



a terrible test, and He, I am sure, would forgive us, had we 
lost it. I write you this beside the unhuried earthly remains of 
my dear, samdy, angelically kind wife. She, as no doubt you 
will remember, always was concerned for my health and well- 
being, and would never permit me to exert myself, go out 
bar^eaded, or take stimulants, to which my weak, sinful 
nature was over-inclined. But now everything is reversed. Her 
eager prayer has been heard. It is she who has gone on and left 
me alone, having died of hunger. Her last act was to force me, 
in the morning cold of these steppes, to take her neck-scarf 
and wrap it round me. God pimishes me, like Job. I, the weak, 
the ailing, have a strength m me which refuses to be ex- 
tinguished, and which I have cursed a thousand times. But 
she, who protected me on earth, has died, and I have to out- 
live her. All the young men of my parish were separated off 
from us in Antakiya, and we know nothing of what has 
happened to them. All the rest, except twenty-seven, of us are 
dead, and I fear I shall be the last, I who am not strong or 
worthy enough to die! Now we get a small daily ration 
of bread and bulgur, because commissions have been m 
the camp, but only enough to prolong our suffering. Perhaps 
today they will send us inshaat taburi to bury all the many, 
many corpses. When they come, they will take my dear one 
away from me, and yet I must be thankful that they do it. 
I have covered this sheet. God keep you, Ter Haigasun, when 
shall we ever meet again . . .’ ” 

The priest had read even these last lines in a toneless, matter- 
of-fact voice. Yet every syllable hung like a counter-weight 
on the bearded faces of the men, weighing them down. 

Bedros Altouni raised his voice, as rusty and sharp as an old 
knife-blade: “Well, I think that now Thomas Kebussyan will 
have ceased to long for the blessings of deportation. We’ve 
been living our own hfe here thirty-eight days now. It’s not 
been easy, but it’s been quite decent, in my opinion Pity that 
later we shan’t any of us get the chance to be proud of 

711 



I suggest that Ter Haigasun should publicly read Ndchudian's 
letter from the altar square.” 

This was most heartily agreed upon. For in the Town Eo* 
closure Kebussyan’s sigh, “OhI i£ we’d gone on the convoyl” 
had long begun to go the rounds. But Gabriel had paid no 
heed to all this, having sat there lost in his own reflections. 
He had already heard the httle pastor’s letter. Now he was 
thinking of Aram’s emotional display of hostihty. He knew 
at once that Iskuhi was the cause. All the less, therefore, would 
he allow himself to be touched by Aram’s insulting tone. He 
had a very great proposal. He strove, therefore, to make his 
words as conciliatory as possible: 

“It’s never occurred to me to gibe at Pastor Aram Tomasian’s 
plans. From the very beginning I’ve considered his suggestion 
for the fishery a good one. If it’s failed, that isn’t the fault of 
the idea, but of the bad tools. As to his suggestion of a new 
camp, I was forced in duty to show that it’s not only un- 
pracucal, but that it would hasten the end and make it crueller 
than ever. On the other hand, Pastor Aram was perfectly 
right to ask me what I propose to do about famine. Now hsten, 
(dease, all of you I I’m going to answer all these questions at 
once. . . .” 

In a sense Gabriel also was improvising, much as the pastor 
had. He, too, had turned the proposal, which now he de- 
veloped in all its details, over in his mind in the night, as 
one among several possibilities, without taking it really seri- 
ously. But so it is. Once an idea, a project, is put into words, 
it is already in the first stage of reality, and has gained a 
solidity of Its own. He turned to Nurhan the Lion, to Shatakh- 
ian, to those who, he hoped, would support him. 

“There’s an old method which the besieged have used from 
time immemorial. . . . The Turks have shifted their camp on 
Musa Dagh. Even if they have six or eight companies and 
Lord knows how many saptiehs, they’ll need most of these 
troops to enclose the mountain. We n^ only reckon how big 

71a 



^ dictance is from Kebussiye to, say, Arsus. It’s evident they 
want to starve us and that therefore they’ll wait a few days 
longer before beginning their big attack. That’s proved by this 
departure of their general who’s going to lead it. You sec how 
important they feel us I ... I’m supposing that this general, 
with his officers, the Kaimakam, and perhaps even other highly 
placed personages will come back very soon and quarter them- 
selves m my house. ... So, therefore, I want to attempt a 
sortie^ you understand. Ter Haigasun? As follows: We’ll 
form an attacking party of picked decads. I don’t know yet 
whether it’ll be four or five hundred men. By tonight I shall 
have thought out the whole scheme in detail. There are plenty 
of ways, between gaps in the fire, of getting down into the 
valley. They’ll have to be exactly reconnoitred. But I know 
for a fact that, down there, their command has only posted 
patrols, who skim the valley during the night. We should 
merely have to find out when they reheve each other, and get 
past when their backs are turned; it wouldn’t be hard. And 
at, say, two or three in the morning we could attack. . . . 
What? . . . No, not Yoghonoluk, we certainly shouldn’t get 
as far as that. . . . We could attack my house, with a fully 
superior strength. Naturally we should have found out the 
number of men they have on guard there. Apart from officers’ 
orderlies, 1 reckon at most on a company of infantry or 
saptiehs. We’ll kill oil the sentries and take quick possession 
of the garden and stables. All the rest is really not for diS' 
cussion here. It’s my business and Chaush Nurhan’s. With 
God’s help we shall take prisoner the general, the Kaimakam, 
the mudir, the yus-bashi, and the other officers. If the whole 
attack is successful, we can have those highly placed gentle- 
men back in the Town Enclosure within two hours, and 
perhaps even flour and provisions.” 

“Gabriel Bagradian’s dreaming, now," crowed the choir- 
singer, Oskaman’s little deputy. 

But the gentle Shatakhian sprang up enthus ias tically, “In 

713 



my opinion Bagradian’s again made the only really bold sug' 
gestion. It’s even more magnificent than the others were. I£' 
we really succeed in getting hold of the villa, and takmg 
prisoner a general, a kaimakam, a yus-bashi, there’s no saying 
what mightn’t come of it. . . .” 

“It’s perfectly ohvious what would come of it,’’ Aram 
Tomasian cut into this disdainfully. “If we capture one of 
their generals and a high official, the Turks will cease to con- 
sider us a ]oke. They’ll send out regiments and brigades against 
us. And if Gabriel Bagradian imagines the army will negotiate 
for Its martinets and make concessions, he’s much mistaken. 
The death of a general or a kaimakam at the hands of Arme- 
nian rebels is just what they want. It puts them completely in 
the right in every foreign country; it’s the fullest justification 
of their Armenian policy. They welcome anything of that 
kind. What do you people in Yoghonoluk know about it? 

I was in Zeitun 

Shatakhian boiled with rage: “It’s not Gabriel Bagradian 
who’s ‘much mistaken,’ it’s you, Pastor, in spite of all your 
Zcitun. I know Ittihad, I know the Young Turks, even if Fve 
only lived in Yoghonoluk. They stick together. They never 
sacrifice one of their own In no circumstances. Point d'hon- 
ueur! And the shameful death of a general or a kaimakam 
would damage their whole prestige in the eyes of the people. 
They couldn’t stand up to it! On the contrary they’d do all 
they possibly could to buy off their big bugs, with Hour, and 
fat, and meat — with freedom even” 

The teacher’s too exuberant optimism moved all the doubt- 
ers to scorn. Again there arose the empty, malicious strife of 
the last sitting, in which no opinion could fully assert itself. 
All that It lacked was the threatening crowd round the hut. 
Ter Haigasun, who, as usual, bore with the din for a certam 
time, tried to get peace by saymg dryly that the usefulness of 
captured generals and kaimakams had better not be disriiiM<»d 
until they’d been caught. 


714 



Meanwhile the sufiering demon in Tomasian had taken tuU 
possession of the pastor. He was wild and senseless enough to 
attack, for no reason, the Orthodox priest: “Ter HaigasunI 
Aren’t you the supreme, responsible head I I accuse you, here, 
of indecision. You let everything slide. You don’t want anyone 
interfering with you. It’s a sheer miracle that with your — what 
shall I call it? — ^your unconcern, we should still be alive 
today. . . .” 

This scabrous attack on the highest authority — umque, im- 
heard of as it was — so much annoyed Altoum, the agnostic, 
that he stridently defended the Orthodox Gregorian vicar 
against the Protestant’s attack: “What have you to complain 
of here, young man ? Nice state of things! You know nothing 
at all of us or of our life, since your father packed you off, as 
a boy, to Marash. Don’t you get too big for your boots!” 

Called to order like an impudent schoolboy, and already 
hot with shame at his own tactlessness, Aram’s voice became 
shriller than ever: “I may be too much of a stranger to under- 
stand you, though the real strangers among you seem to under- 
stand you well enough. But I still keep to my first suggestion. 
More — ^I’ve decided to do what I think fit on behalf of my- 
self and my family. When was it ever written that we must 
all keep together to the end ? It’d be far wiser to break up the 
whole camp Let each family save itself — ^as best it can. It’s 
much easier to catch a whole shoal of us in one place. But, 
if we disperse all over the coast, then perhaps some at least 
of us will be left alive, in one way or another. I mean to pack 
up and get out with my whole family and find a way for my- 
self. I said my whole family, Gabriel Bagradian.” 

Ter Haigasun had not once lost his temper through the 
whole of this very stormy session. When, exactly six days pre- 
viously, he had kicked Oskanian out of the hut, it -had been 
done regally, with just the necessary emphasis. Even now he 
showed no signs of excitement as he stood up, pale, almost 
ceremonious. “That’s enough. Our sessions have no further 

715 



object. The pec^le elected m to lead them. I herewith, on dw 
thirty-eighth day, declare this warrant to be cancelled, since 
this Council of Leaders has no longer the necessary strength 
and unity to make decisions. If it’s possible for a man like 
Aram Tomasian, responsible for the civil law and order of this 
camp, to suggest its being broken up, it’s obvious that we have 
no right to exact obedience and subordination from anyone 
else. So that, here and now, things become as they were again, 
before the Council was chosen by the villages. The mukhtars 
take over the sole charge of their communes, and I, as chief 
priest of the district, the guidance of the commumty as a 
whole. And in that capacity I request Gabriel Bagradian that 
he should continue to lead our defence. His command is in- 
dependent. It rests with him whether he decides on a surprise 
attack or on any other method of armed resistance. Further, 
in my capacity as priest, I decree a solemn Mass of petition, 
the time for which shall be given out later. I have no right 
to reject any possible chance of a rescue. Consequently, Pastor 
Aram Tomasian, after this Mass, will get his opportunity of 
repeating his present suggesuon to the whole people and giv- 
ing his reasons. Then the majority can decide whether it 
would rather leave the mountain or continue to trust to the 
valour of our fighters and the plans of our military leader. 
But, once this decision has been taken, we must also pass a 
resolution that anyone who, by deed or word of mouth, sets 
himself up against the general will is to be shot instantly.— 
Well, nowl Any further suggestions?” 

In peaceful times it is very pleasant to be a leader, but when 
one IS two paces away from destruction it seems more inviting 
to lose oneself in the anonymous herd. The mukhtars had be- 
come simple village mayors again, and nothing more. The 
Council of Leaders, chosen by the Great Assembly in the 
garden of Villa Bagradian, dispersed quietly, without protest 
Ter Haigasun had made a wise move and at the same timi- a 
tremendous sacrifice. The leadership had been purged of all 

716 



its cantankerous, undependable elements. But now he alone, 
in this hour of finality, would have to guide his people througfi 
death, to God. They left the govemment-hut in silence. 

But Aram hated Ter Haigasun; he hated Gabriel Bagradian, 
and him self even more than either. He took curt leave of his 
father, without answering his many despairing questions. 
The days of the Zeitun convoy came back to chide him. Had 
he not even then disgraced the Gospel and left his sheep, his 
children, on the third day? Bitterly the pastor admitted that 
it IS always the same sin by which men are trapped. And how 
much more basely, shamefully, crazily, had he failed to with- 
stand today’s temptation. Aram at first wandered about the 
Damlayik; then he clambered down the path to the beach, 
for another effort to solve the insoluble problems of his fishery. 

It would be better, he felt, not to wait for the people’s de- 
cision and set out at once with Hovsannah and the child. 
Kevork would be all the help they needed. He would of course 
have to leave his father, who would certainly refuse to fly. 
The swimmers had easily reached Alcxandretta, via Arsus. 
Why should not he and his small family, in three mght 
marches along the coast, be able to get as far as they? Herr 
Hoffmann, who had given them hospitality, was a Protestant, 
and would not shut his doors against a Protestant pastor. 
Naturally his priesthood was at an end, after today’s disgrace- 
ful lapse into sin. Tomasian felt in his pocketbook. He had 
fifty pounds, a lot of money. Then, with a grimace of moral 
repugnance, he stared down at the surf around his feet. And 
Iskuhi? 

It was written, however, that neither Aram’s plan nor Ga- 
briel’s should reach fulfilment, and th^t no plebiscite should 
be held. It is always the same; the dam has broken before the 
waves come surging over it, and usually in the least expected 
place. 

In the area of the South Bastion there was a wide plateau. 

717 



feeing seawards, overgrown with short, dry crop-grass. There 
Sarkis Kilikian and the circumspect commissar of the section, 
Hrand Oskanian, had set up their camp. Two deserters a few 
yards off played a game of shells with the long-haired thief of 
goat’s flesh. These “deserters” might have been anything. The 
various fortunes of the game were being acclaimed with cries 
in every language spoken in Syria. The teacher was doing his 
best to impress the Russian with his grandiloquence. He talked 
so loud and so emphatically that even the tattered gamesters 
stopped to listen from time to time to his bold opinions. But 
Sarkis, stretched out full length, and with Knkor’s cold chibuk 
between his teeth, was stubbornly silent under all the excited 
efforts of the dwarf. 

“You’re an educated man, a man who has studied, Kilik- 
ian,” the fuzzy-haired teacher was insisting, “so you’ll under- 
stand me. I’ve never said much, you know. I’ve valued my 
thoughts too much. I never even said it to the apothecary, who 
cribbed a lot of my opinions. You know what life is, Kihkian 
—It’s knocked you about more than any of us. And me, too, if 
you’ll believe me I, Hrand Oskanian, have never been any- 
thing all my life but a measly teacher in a dirty village. What 
can you know about me^ But all the same, I have my idea. 
Would you care to hear it? — ‘Finish the whole thing’ is what 
I say. Since what’s the good of anything else?” 

Sarkis leaned up on his elbow to crumble a piece of the 
tobacco Krikor had given him. All the others mixed this pure, 
blond leaf with dried herbs. Sarkis smoked his unmixed, not 
seeming to worry about the fact that his ration was thus 
finished twice as quickly The once silent Oskanian had found 
a master of silence in the Russian. Kilikian’s silence would 
have withered the leaves off a tree. In the teacher’s case it 
served to unloose a flood of boastful words, on the surface of 
which, undigested, dishonoured, swam stray shreds of Krikor’s 
conversation. 

“Well, then, Kilikian, you understand me, and I you. You 

718 



don’t even need to tell me so. Like you, I don’t believe there’s 
a God. Why should there be such a piece of tomfoolery? The 
world is a lump of dung, spinning m space-^ere chemistry 
and astronomy, that’s all it isl I’ll show you Krikor’s book of 
stars— there you can sec it all, in pictures. Nothing but nature. 
And, if anyone made it, the devil did. There’s a pig hidden in 
it, an unclean swme. But it can’t take the last thing oif me, 
Kihkian, see what I mean? We can spit in its face, we can 
make it look small, show it who really is the stronger, stamp 
it out! You see? — ^Wcll, that’s my ideal I, Hrand Oskanian, 
small as I am, can show nature and the devil, and God Al- 
mighty, what’s what! I can annoy them, punish them. The 
gendemen shall turn yellow with rage at Hrand Oskanian, 
against whom they’re all so powerless, understand? I’ve found 
one or two people who see what I mean. I go along to the huts 
in the night someumes. Ter Haigasun, ha, ha' can’t stop me 
doing that. Have you ever watched that half-wit Kevork 
chucking out his corpses off the rock^ They fly like white 
birds. Well, that’s my idea! We’ll all fly away, you and me 
and one or two more of us, before they force us, against our 
wills. One short step, and you don’t know anything more ull 
you touch the water. See’’ Then we shall all be dissolved in 
the waves. We shall have chosen that for ourselves, and so the 
devil and the Turks, and all the other gentry, will shout for 
rage, because we’ve beaten them, because it’s really they who’ve 
been the weak ones. Do you see, Kilikian?” 

Sarkis Kilikian had long since been stretched out on his 
back again. His death’s skull stared up at scurrying clouds. 
Nothing about him suggested that he had even listened to 
Oskanian’s panegyric of suicide. 

But the long-haired thief stopped his game and glanced at- 
tentively at this cunning vanquisher of nature, as though he 
at least had grasped “the idea,” and considered it really not 
so bad. He wriggled a little nearer. “How many store<hcsts 
are there in those three tents?” 

719 



The teacher stuttered and flushed. He had spoken shame- 
fully into a void. And any mention of Three-Tent Square was 
still painful. On the other hand, here was a chance to show 
all these hard-bitten devils who he really was, a “notable,” the 
educated member of a very different social class, one of the 
people’s chosen representatives. 

Oskanian’s tone was something between bragging and dis- 
dain. “Only store<hcsts? Chests are about the least of what 
she has. Why, they’ve got huge great cupboards, boxes twice 
the size of wardrobes. And more women’s clothes inside them 
than the richest pasha ever heard of. And all different. She not 
only wears a diflerent dress every day, she changes three times 
a day . . .” 

“What do I care about her clothes? What I want to know 
is how much food she has.” 

Oskanian threw hack his head. It was now so hirsute with 
wiry beard and fuzzy hair that only a tiny patch of yellowish 
face still peeped from its midst. “Well, I can tell you that 
exactly. No one knows that better than I do, because down 
in the villa the hanum asked to sec me when all the stuff was 
being chosen and packed up. Well, they’ve got whole towers 
of little silver boxes with fish in oil swimming in them. 
They’ve got sweet bread and chocolate and biscuits. They’ve 
got jars and jars of wine. They’ve got American smoked meat, 
and whole baskets of groats and oatmeal.” 

Oskanian stopped at the oatmeal. Beads of sweat stood out 
on his forehead. He slapped his knee mournfully. “Finish itl 
Finish it all!” 

And Sarkis Kihkian answered, in a very monosyllabic 
growl: “We mean to . . . tomorrow evening.” 

The httle teacher’s hands turned cold as ice as he heard this 
sleepily casual remark. Nor did they become any warmer 
when Kilikian, in four curt, casual sentences, explained their 
intentions. Oskanian’s round, pebble eyes stared as intently 
at the Russian as though his ears were not enough to listen 

720 



wuL Yet what he heard had iot long been common talk 
among the men of the South Bastioa Sarkis Kilikian the de- 
serter, and a few others under his influence, had had quite 
enough of the Damlayik. They intended to get away early 
before it was light, on the morning after the following day. 
The basest treachery to the commune! Perhaps only Kiiikian 
had this feehng, to some slight degree. The others merely saw 
Musa Dagh, not as a fortified camp, m which they had 
pledged themselves to hold out, but as a temporary shelter, 
paid for at the very high rental of nearly forty days’ fighung 
service. Now they were hungry. Famine had, in a sense, dis- 
solved the contract. For several days no food had come down 
to them from their hosts save a few heaps of repulsive bones. 
Were they really to be asked to starve slowly, merely in order 
to fall into Turkish hands? What did they care for the peo- 
ple of the seven villages? Only a few of them had belonged to 
the Armenian valley. After all, before Ter Haigasun and Ba- 
gradian had come to take possession of the Damlayik, they 
had hved fairly well on the mountain. Not a man of them 
had the least intention of sharing the fate of the five thousand. 
Why should they? They could so easily save their own skins. 
It merely meant that they returned to the old life — the life 
before the forty days. Beyond the Orontes, to the south, there 
extended the barren heights of Jebel el Akra, ridge upon ridge, 
almost as far as Latakia. This Jebel el Akra was not well 
watered and green like Musa Dagh, but barren, trackless, 
ragged, and so the place for refugees. Quite a simple plan. In 
the night, about a hundred strong, they would descend on the 
Orontes plain, past Habaste and the ruins. Since all the troops 
in the valley were concentrated round the northern heights, 
there would probably be only a few packets of saptiehs on 
night-duty guarding the edge of the mountain and the Orontes 
bridge at £1 Eskel. Not much fear of dangerous resistance! 
Whether or not they had to fight their way, the hundred could 
no doubt soon be across the narrow plain and have reached 

721 



the mounuins by sunrise. During their secret discussion a tew 
of the more scrupulous among them had asked if it might per- 
haps not'be permissible to warn the Council of their deasion. 
This mere question had nearly led to their being thrashed. 
What would have been the results of such stupidity? 

And this criminal clement refused to be satisfied with mere 
disappearance into the night. It had serious reasons to back 
its policy. First, there was the question of munitions. On that 
would depend the future existence of any vagrant robber band. 
That was the real meaning of the demand made by the long- 
haired thief with such cringing insolence to Gabriel, on the 
day their forbidden bonfire had been extinguished. Chaush 
Nurhan issued cartridges very sparingly. Only when a fight 
had almost begun, were mumtions brought into the trench, 
and even then someone in the confidence of the leaders would 
distribute as few of them as possible. These deserters at pres- 
ent had only about five shots to a rifle. An impossible state of 
affairs I But in the government-hut the lockers stood one above 
the other, there were troughs of cartridges. Nurhan’s “factory” 
had worked on without a break, not only filling the used cases, 
but making fresh bullets for them to fire. The deserters felt 
It unavoidably necessary to supplement their present supplies 
from the camp armoury. With that object they must visit the 
government-hut; when and how still seemed undecided. And 
at the same time they could take a look round the enclosure, 
to see if this or that might not be worth carrying. A prolonged 
sojourn on the barren heights of Jcbel el Akra would demand 
certain necessary implements, which the people here in camp, 
whose fate was sealed, could have no possible further use for. 
And, while they were looking round the enclosure, they could 
always keep their eyes open for certain unpopular public fig- 
ures. Ter Haigasun, for instance. The priest had never pre- 
tended to like deserters. He had taken every possible chance 
of bringing the rigours of camp life home to them. You might 
reckon that the South Basuon as a whole had had five fast 

722 



days to put up with. Nor had Ter Haigasun scrupled to sen- 
tence one or another o£ its garrison to a sharp dose of basd> 
nado. It could do no possible harm to settle accounts. 

Sarkis Kilikian still lay on his back, heeding neither Oskan- 
ian’s conversation nor the dark hints of the long-haired thief. 
Had any mortal been able to look into his mind, he would 
have found nothing there except impatience. His impatience 
was that of the scurrying clouds above his head. The brain 
behind that extinguished mask was restless with longing to 
break out of one jail into the next. 

The teacher had long since scrambled up on to his thin 
httlc legs. And he jutted his pigeon breast, as if to show that 
he, the panegyrist of suicide, would shrink from no deed, 
however bold. He stood there pursing his bps and wagging 
liis head at them. He never stirred to warn the camp Kilikian 
and the others must take this as a sign of admiration. The 
thought of giving the alarm fluttered behind the teacher’s 
forehead like a caught bird. Against it his perpetual vain 
terror of being thought weak by Kilikian and the other “dare- 
devils” — ^he a “daredevil” among the rest! So that then, against 
his better judgment, a piece of vague, but still profoundly 
treacherous information slipped out of him: 

“Tomorrow in the late afternoon. Ter Haigasun has ar- 
ranged a special Mass of petition. But the decads are to stay 
in the trenches.” 

One of the other “daredevils” answered Oskanian’s self- 
abasement appropriately: “Well, then, you’ll stay here with us 
nil tomorrow, see! So that we can be sure you’ll keep your 
mouth shut.” 

The deserters shoved their government commissar in front 
of them back to their trenches. They need not have troubled 
to do this, since he came as a voluntary prisoner, without 
thoughts of escape. And they never once let him out of their 
sight. He sat perched glumly on an observation post, staring 
down at the narrow ribbon of highroad, far below, which 

7*3 



leads from Antakiya to Suedia. Hatred of Gabriel, Juliette, 
Ter Haigasun, suddenly seemed to have flickered out of his 
heart. Fear had replaced it. He prayed that the Turks might 
attack. But they seemed to have no intention at all of breaking 
their heads a second time against the rocks of this barren 
slope. There was peaceful traffic on the road through the 
Orontes plain. Ox-carts, sumpter mules, two camels even, took 
their slow way to market at Sucdia, as though on Musa Dagh 
there were not so much as an Armenian. Only near Yedidje, at 
the foot of the outer slopes of the mountain, did a tiny dust- 
cloud suddenly rise. As it settled again, a small, grey army 
car could be distinguished. 

It had dawned, the fortieth day on Musa Dagh, the eighth 
of September, the third of famine. Today the women had not 
troubled to go in search of unnutritious herbs from which to 
concoct a bitter tea. Spring water was just as filling. All still 
able to stand clustered round the various well-springs— old 
men, mothers, girls, children. It was a queer sight. Again and 
again, one after another, these exhausted faces bent down to 
the water-jets to drink without thirst, out of hollow hands, as 
though to drink were an urgent duty. Many lay down flat, 
breathing heavily, feeling that their bodies were like some 
porous clay that stiffened slowly in the air. Others dreamed 
happily. They felt certain that now they were growing wings, 
that as soon as ever they liked they could spread them for a 
short blissful flight. Over them all lay a veil of gentle slowness. 
The small children were all fast asleep; the bigger ones had 
ceased to be noisy. That morning three old people died, and 
two sucklings. The mothers kept their wretched creatures 
pressed against empty breasts until they stiffened and be- 
came cold. 

In contrast to these in the Town Enclosure, the men out in 
the trenches had still life and energy enough in them. Though 
they, too, were anything but sated. The meat ration and ^ 

7 ^ 



remains of G^riel’s tinned food had not been even enough to 
take the first edge o£E their hunger. Yet these privations pro- 
duced a strange mentality in the fighters. They inspired them 
with a crazy longing to do battle^ get things settled once and 
for all. Thu new state of things had at least the advantage 
that Gabriel could arrange his proposed night-raid without 
having to trouble himself with the question whether or not 
the people would elect to leave the Damlayik. He was sure of 
his fighters. He had planned the attack for that same night. 

So every detail of this raid into the valley was discussed. 
He had forgotten nothing. Every man had his place, and 
every minute had been considered. Nothing had been left 
to chance. 

He had decided to keep the Turks occupied all that day, and 
alarm them, on the northern heights, with sudden bursts of 
firing and shows of attack, to get them to move as many 
troops as possible out of the valley. Unexpectedly they antici- 
pated his wishes and performed this tactic of themselves. Their 
preparations plainly showed that, within the next twenty-four 
hours, everything was going to be decided. The heights bc' 
yond the Saddle were alive with the bustle of trench warfare 
before an attack. Over there, the Armenians could catch sight 
of lines of infantrymen, slowly and gingerly advancing, drag- 
ging thick tree-trunks, stripped of their branches, which they 
dropped with a clatter on the hillside. There could be no 
doubt that these smooth, strong stems were to be made to serve 
as moving cover, when the extended lines crawled on. Gabriel 
and Chaush Nurhan went from man to man in the front-line 
trench, levelling sights to get the distances. Whenever one of 
the Turks on the counter-slope ventured too far out from 
among the trees, they gave single orders to fire. By midday 
a few enemies were disposed of. The one deadly bullet was 
always answered by a wild, undisciplined volley, which either 
passed over the heads of defenders, or spent itself in the 
heaped-up stones of the parapets. The fighters perceived with 

725 



crazy pride that their new defence works were so strong that 
it would need artillery to deal with them. But of that there 
was still no indication. The strange drunkenness of hunger 
produced bouts of madness in these men. They were eager to 
use any method of luring the Turks to attack. They climbed 
their trench and danced on the parapet; many ventured far 
out into the obstacle zone. The Turks refused to be enticed. 

At about midday Ter Haigasun came to visit the trench. 
Gabriel asked him to say a prayer in their midst, since the 
decads would not be present that afternoon at the great service 
of petition. He prayed with them. Gabriel had also to tell the 
priest that these men’s votes need not be taken at the pldaiscitc, 
since they had announced their decision through Chaush 
Nurhan of going wherever their leader might care to take 
them. Ter Haigasun was surprised at Gabriel’s energy; tnc 
leader glowed with the excitement of coming action. Only a 
few days back he had still believed that this soul had not the 
raw strength needed to recover from Stephan’s horrible death. 
But on his way back to the enclosure Ter Haigasun knew that 
Bagradian’s soul had withstood nothing but itself, and even 
that, perhaps, for no more than these last few hours of in- 
tensity. 

General Ali Risa Bey was one of the youngest brigadier- 
generals of the Turkish army. He was not yet forty But Ali, 
both in appearance and mentality, was the exact opposite of 
bis chief, the picturesque dictator of Syria. He was, up to a 
Mint, representative of the very latest, most European type 
)f soldier. It was only necessary to watch him walk up and 
lown, as he did at present, in the selamlik of Villa Bagradian, 
vhcre a subdued officers’ council followed his steps with timid 
. yes, to perceive his mentality. And the whole difference be- 
came apparent when one compared this young general with, 
for instance, the wounded yus-bashi, whose arm was sull 
bandaged, and who waited, in the respectful posture pre- 



scribed, on some stray remark from his superior. This major, ’ 
with his cigarette-stauied fingers, his tired and dissipated face, 
had something forlorn and shghtly soiled about him, when 
contrasted with Ah Risa Bey. And now, impatiently, the gen- 
eral pushed open the drawmg-room windows to let out the 
clouds of smoke, with which the other officers filled the room. 
He neither smoked nor drank; he loved neither woman nor 
man; and it was said that, because of a weak stomach, he 
hved exclusively on raw goat’s milk. A translucent asceuc of 
war. The onbashi came m to him with a report. 

The general glanced at it; he compressed thin bps. “We’ve 
just had some losses from an Armenian attack in the north. 
... I intend to make company commanders strictly responsi- 
ble for this sort of thing ... I hope you gentlemen will all 
take note of what I say: I’ve promised His Excellency that not 
a single man on our side shall be sacrificed in this whole 
action. . . . We’re clearing out a camp of scoundrelly muti- 
neers. . . . Anything else would be sheer disgrace. . . . Dis- 
graceful enough to have let it get so far.” 

His glance sought out the adjutant. “Still no news of those 
two batteries.?” 

The adjutant answered a brief “No.” For two days now 
they had been impatiently cxpecung the arrival of mountain 
artillery, sent to Aleppo. But, since this transport came, not 
via Aleppo, but by way of Beilan and the difficult route across 
the passes, it was delaying endlessly. So that now the general 
had been forced to put off his mam attack till tomorrow. 

He stopped again in front of one of the junior officers. “How 
many yards of telephone wire are there in the company 
stores.?” 

The' young officer paled and began to mumble. All Risa Bey 
did not even listen. “Well, it’s no business of mine. But by this 
evening, by one hour before sunset, mind, a telephone must 
have been installed in this house, connecting me up with the 
mountain, both northwards and southwards. How it’s to be 

727 



done is your look*out. I shall want telephonic rqwrts to* 
morrow’s attack from the major. Now you can go.” 

The wretched jumor, who had not the vaguest notion how 
many coils of wire the companies had, and considered this an 
impossible duty, shuffled oS despairingly to attempt it. 

And now the general added sharply: “Yus-Bashi ... If you 
please . . 

That wounded hero pulled himself together. The two went 
into the empty anteroom. Ali Risa threw a frigid, hasty 
glance at the yus-bashi’s wounded arm. “Yus-Bashi, I’m giving 
you your chance in these operations to redeem the gross 
blunder of which you’ve been guilty.” 

The yus-bashi raised his wounded arm in suggestive pro- 
test; he had done more than his duty! “I myself, General, went 
close up to those support trenches of theirs, above Habaste, 
yesterday. They’re perfectly empty. The crew is no longer 
manning its supports. It was an hour before sunset.” 

“Good* And your four companies?” 

"I think that covered advance of theirs in the night has 
fully succeeded. Not so much as a lantern was shown. All day 
yesterday the men never moved out of Habaste. Now they’re 
disposed under the rocks, in fully concealed positions. And the 
three machine-guns of my group.” 

“Tomorrow evening, when it’s over, you’ll telephone me, 
Yus-Bashi. Once you’re on the summit, I don’t want you to 
go on any further.” 

With that the conversation came to an end. Ah Risa had 
already turned away. 

But the yus-bashi’s voice halted him: “General, excuse me, 
please. I want to say something. It’s just this. . . . These de- 
serters — ^I’vc managed to find out that it isn’t only a question 
of Armenians. . . . And yesterday an ex-Armenian came to 
see me, a lawyer, a Dr. Hekimian — he’s been converted to the 
true belief. . . . Well, he’s ready to treat with these fellows, 
and get them to vacate their trench voluntarily. . . . Perhaps 

728 



we might have to make a few concessions, but on the other 
hand we’d be certain of not having losses.” 

The general had listened quietly. Suddenly he interrupted: 
“Out of the question, Yus-Bashi! We can’t ever allow it to be 
said of us that we could clear out these Armenian devils only 
because some of them happened to be traitors. Just think what 
the foreign press would say! It would pour out venom over 
His Excellency and the whole Fourth Army.” 

Heavy steps came echoing over the tiles of the entrance- 
hall. The tall, sagging shape of the Kaimakam, followed by 
the freckled mudir, came into the room. The Kaimakam 
touched his fez carelessly. “At last, gentlemen! General, your 
batteries will reach Sanderan in three hours. Your people 
seem even less businesslike than mine . . .” 

All Risa’s clear, ascetic face always irritated the ultra-bilious 
Kaimakam. He decided to annoy this soldier. With his hand 
already on the door-handle, he turned before going out of 
the room, supercilious. “I hope our armed forces don’t intend 
to disappoint us a fourth time.” 

Shushik, Haik’s mother, served Juliette clumsily, but with 
deep devotion. Juliette was really convalescent, although so 
wasted and enfeebled that she tottered with every step she 
took. Her face had a bluish, whitish tinge. Or rather her face 
was colourless, as if, after such an illness, it wanted to look 
as different as possible from the dark, sunburnt faces all round 
it. Now Juliette could sit up for an hour, two hours, every 
day. She would sink down in front of her looking-glass, put 
her head on her arms, and never move. And she would kneel, 
as she had before in her desperation, by the bedside, pressing 
her face into the small, lace-edged cushion, her last home 
The worst sign of spiritual havoc was that now her two 
dominant instincts — to look beautiful and to keep clean — 
seemed to have died in her. The laundry basket stood open m 
the tent. But she neither felt in it nor asked for any clean 

729 



dungs. Nor, in utter contradiction to the fantasies that ob- 
sessed her mind, did she reach out for the Bask of ^au de 
printemps, in which dregs stiJl waited to be used, to attempt 
to freshen her efried-up sAin. She did not even step into the 
slippers which stood ready beside her bed, but tottered bare- 
foot the few steps she was able to manage. 

Shushik saw in Juliette a mother driven mad by the horrible 
death of her only child. Haik was alive! And more than that! 
His hfe for all time was secure. Jackson protected him, and 
America! These words, to Shushik, connoted supernatural 
powers. Jackson! He was not a man, but presumably the 
head-archangel himself, brandishing a fiery sword. She had 
been more blessed than any other mother on Musa Dagh. 
Must she not day and night bestir herself to serve and thank, 
thank and serve! And whom should she thank, whom serve, if 
not this other mother, on whom the full curse had descended.^ 
This was a rich hanum, a distinguished lady, a foreigner. 
Shushik’s voice had been loud and rough for years, and yet 
now she cooed like any sucking dove, almost singing her com- 
fort. It was all so simple. This world is this world. But over 
there Lord Jesus, the Saviour, has arranged things so well that 
all shall be reunited And first of all mothers will see their 
children again. Up there in heaven mothers see their children, 
not as those grown-up sons and daughters whom they have 
left behind them in the world, but as real little children, just 
as they were between two and five. And good mothers, up 
there in heaven, are allowed to carry their children in then 
arms. 

Bhssfully lost in such a prospect, the giganac Shushik 
raised her arms up and cradled a tiny, invisible Haik. Shushik , 
imagined that this foreigner did not understand her speech. 
She sat down on the ground beside the hanum, considering 
how she could comfort and be of use. She touched Juliette’s 
frozen feet. With a soft litde moan of pity she pressed these 
feet between her breasts, while her great, leathery peasant 

7^0 



hands first stroked, and then began to chafe them. Juliette shut 
her eyes and sank back. Shushik had no doubt that the un- 
happy woman was mad. And she fully understood this mad- 
ness — ^how far along the way to it she herself had gone, before 
that blissful news called her backl She was far too rough and 
simple to suspect that this was not real madness at all, but 
a kind of burrow, in which the hanum crouched away from 
dayht consciousness. And Bcdros Hekim shared Shushik's 
view, considering Juliette’s present state of mind as an aberra- 
tion, resulting from the spotted plague A surprising incident, 
in the course of his ViSit to the patient on the morning of this 
fortieth day, seemed fully to justify his belief The old man 
had sat on the edge of Juliette’s bed, doing his best in such 
French as he could muster to bring hope and life to this frozen 
soul. Everything seemed to be going splendidly. The war 
would be certain to end within a few weeks, and so the world 
would be at peace again. Madame must have heard of the visit 
of the Agha Rifaat Bereket, from Antakiya Well, this old, in- 
fluential Turkish gentleman had clearly hinted that Gabriel 
Bagradian and Madame would be given permission to go back 
to France, almost at once His kindness changed the grumpy 
old sceptic into a most inventive teller of children’s tales. Even 
the edged scornfulness of his voice sounded protective. But, as 
he sat relating these pretty fables, Iskuhi had come suddenly 
into the doorway. 

Juliette, who, with amiably absent eyes, had seemed all this 
while to be listening to the doctor’s poetry, started at the sight 
of Iskuhi. She sat up in terror, drew up her knees, and began 
to scream: “Not her' Not her' Tell her to go' ... I won’t 
take anything from her' . . . She wants to kill me. . . .’’ 

Strangest of all, Iskuhi stood listening to these frenzies and 
never moved, her own small face like a mask of madness, 
looking as though she too might scream her answer. Bedros 
Hekim, perturbed, stared from one to the other. Now he 
could sense some gruesome reality Long after Iskuhi had 

731 



vanished, Juliette, whose enfeebled heart was thumping, would 
still not be pacified. 

What had happened to Iskuhi? 

For five days she had not seen Gabriel. For two days she 
had had no food. But Iskuhi wanted to go hungry, and not 
only because she starved with her whole people. For five long 
days she had not seen Gabriel, but in exchange her brother 
Aram had twice come to the door of her tent. Then she 
crouched inside and refused to open. Each of these five dayo 
with all Its hours, which lasted years, had crept intolerably. 
Why did not Gabriel come'* Iskuhi waited for Gabriel every 
second of the day and night. Now, even if her exhausted body 
had had the strength to let her do it, she would not have gone 
out to him in the trench. Less every hour would she have 
gone I She was lying, breathing deeply on her bed, in what 
had been Hovsannah’s tent, and could not manage to move a 
limb. A roaring in her ears, like surf on a beach, seemed to 
burst her skull. And yet this roaring was still not loud enough 
to overwhelm the truth in her mind. . . . How many min- 
utes were there to waste on the Damlayik? And Gabriel 
wasted not only irreplaceable minutes, but whole eternal days 
of their short love. Wasted? Love? Implacably Iskuhi brought 
to mind all that she had experienced with Gabriel. Yes, Ga- 
briel had been gentle with her. But his grief was for Stephan. 
And, when he opened his heart, it had been in compassion, 
sorrow, for his adulterous wife. Gabriel had at least been frank 
with her. Really his whole attitude seemed to say: “Little sister, 
I thank you, with my cold hands, my distant, brotherly kisses, 
for having tried so hard to bear my pain with me. But how 
could you, a poor little girl from Yoghonoluk, ever do it? In 
spite of all this, and for ever, I belong to the Frenchwoman, 
the stranger. I shall die, not with Iskuhi, but with Juliette. 
Juliette may have played me false, but I bow to her, I only 
bend over Iskuhi.” 


732 



Would it have been any different, Iskuhi asked herself, if 
Juliette had, as in her heart she had longed she might a hun- 
dred times, died of her fever? And she perceived: No! If 
Juliette had died, Gabriel would have loved her, Iskuhi, far 
less, even. How that sick woman could spy out secrets* Iskuhi 
wanted never to go back into Juliette’s tent, never see her 
again. Yet it was not Juliette’s fault; hers less than anyone’s. 
What made Iskuhi unworthy to be loved? She was not Euro- 
pean, only a poor village girl from Yoghonoluk, the daughter 
of an Armenian village carpenter. Was it really that? Was 
Gabriel himself “European”? Did he not even come from the 
very same Armenian village? She had lived two years in 
Switzerland, and he, in Paris, twenty-three. That was all the 
difference. When he looked at her, he told her that she was 
beautiful. Stop! That was it! Why did he often look at her so 
oddly, with eyes that half saw? Something in her disturbed 
him and made him cold. Iskuhi conquered her enfceblemcnt 
and hurried to look in the little mirror, which stood on the 
table. She need not have looked in her glass. She knew with- 
out looking. She was crippled — a cripple now, though not born 
one. In these six months since the convoy from Zeitun, her 
left arm had got worse and worse. If she did not help it with 
a sling, it hung, withered and twisted, at her side. Gabriel had 
to watch her deformity, no matter how skilfully concealed. 

She knew! Once he had lightly kissed her crippled arm. 
Now Iskuhi felt she could remember the compassionate effort 
this kiss had cost him. Iskuhi fell back on her bed. The roar- 
ing in her ears rose like a sea-storm. She kept making convul- 
sive efforts to justify Gabriel’s absence by the facts. No doubt, 
m these last hungry days, things had been disorganized in his 
trenches. He must have had to work out a whole new de- 
fence. And shots had begun again. None of these reasoned 
explanations gained the least influence on Iskuhi. But, like the 
ground-note of the storm roaring in her ears, she could hear 
her own voice, yet a stranger’s. Her voice sang the chanson 

733 



d^amour which she had sung at Juhette’s behest one day in 
Villa Bagradian. Stephan had been there, and Gabriel came 
into the room. The first lines of that ancient folk-song kept 
a ritournelle in her head, till their sound crazed her; 

‘‘She came out of her garden, 

And held them close against her breasts. 

Two fruits of the pomegranate tree . . . 

She gave them me, I would not take.” 

The song stopped there. Instantly the horror overcame her, 
which had spared her so long. The face on the highroad to 
Marash, the kaleidoscopic, twisting grimace of that scrubby 
murderer, was upon her. Its gyrations ceased, as if something 
had gone wrong with the kaleidoscope. And now in some 
secret fashion the staring mask was turning into Gabriel’s face, 
but far more hateful, murderous even. Iskuhi could not 
breathe for fear and misery. Dumbly she wept for help. Aram I 

And, indeed, at about this minute Pastor Aram had almost 
reached his sister’s tent. He was with Hovsannah, who carried 
her poor brat in her arms. No sound from within when Aram 
gruffly demanded entrance He whipped out his knife and 
slit up the lacing of the door, knotted on the inside. The 
pastor had let the big sack he shouldered slip to the ground. 
The woman, with her almost hfeless bundle, her suckling, 
kept a few paces behind him. 

At that moment, had Pastor Tomasian been himself — ^mild, 
evangelical, affectionate, the strong, cheery brother of Zeitun — 
Iskuhi might perhaps have no longer hesitated, but gone 
along with him. Why should she stay alone in this empty 
tent? She knew she had not the strength to walk very far. 
Somewhere it would all end gently, the roaring in her ears, 
Gabriel, she herself. But, instead of the cheery brother of 
Zeitun, some fierce, unknown bully stood in her tent. He 
brandished a stick. 

‘‘Get up! Get ready! You’re coming with us!” 

714 



These hard words rolled like rocks upon Iskuhi. Rigid on 
her bed, she stared up at this unknown Aram. Now she could 
not have moved, even had she been inclined to obey. 

Tomasian gripped his stick more ughtly still. “Didn’t you 
hear what I said.^ I order you to get up this instant and make 
ready. As your elder brother, as your spiritual father, I order 
you. You undei stand? I’ll see if we can’t snatch you from 
your sin.” 

Till the word “sin” it had all been a maze. She had lain 
there rigid. “Sin” struck out a hundred well-springs of angry 
recalcitrance from the rock. All Iskuhi’s weakness fell away. 
She sprang up. Retreating behind the bed, she clenched her 
small right fist to defend herself 

A new enemy glowered into the tent, Ilovsannah. “Leave 
her, Pastor! Give her up! She’s a lost woman. I beg you not 
to go too near her, she may infect you Leave her' If she 
comes with us, God will only punish us still morel There’s no 
sense in it I Come, Pastor! I’ve always known the kind she 
was. You were always foolish about her. Even in the school 
in Zeitun she could never keep her eyes off the young teach- 
ers, the sinful piece I Leave her, I beg you, Pastor, and come!” 

Iskuhi’s eyes grew bigger and bigger with rage. Since 
Juliette’s illness she had seen no more of Hovsannah and had 
no idea that this was a madly hysterical woman. The young 
pastor’s wife looked horribly changed To appease God’s wrath 
with a sacrifice, she had cropped her pretty hair close to her 
skuU. Now her face looked small and witchlike in its malice. 
Everything about her looked small and shrivelled, except her 
belly, which still protruded, a diseased consequence of her 
labour. 

And now Hovsannah, in an indescribable gesture of accusa- 
tion, thrust her swaddled suckling out in Iskuhi’s face. She 
screeched: “Look there! You alone brought this ill-luck on 
us!” 

It brought the first sounds from Iskuhi’s lips: “Jesus Maria!” 

735 



Her liead sunk forwards. She thought of HovsaQoah's diffi* 
cult labour, and how she had used her back as support. What 
did these crazy people want ? Why couldn’t they give her any 
peace, on the very last day of her life? 

The pastor meanwhile had pulled out a clumsy silver watch. 
He dangled it. “I give you ten minutes to get ready in.” 

He turned to Hovsannah. “No. She’s to come with us. I 
won't leave her. I have to answer for her, to God. . . .” 

Iskuhi still remained behind the bed, without a movement. 
Aram did not wait his whole ten minutes, but after three of 
them left the tent. His clumsy watch still dangled from his 
fist. Out on Three-Tent Square it had meanwhile become 
strangely noisy. 

The twenty-three had appeared noiselessly; they now moved 
on across the open space between the sheikh-tent and 
Juliette’s. The long-haired thief, from the airs he gave him- 
self, seemed to be their “leader.” Sato, the twenty-fourth mem- 
ber of the band, equally seemed to feel herself their guide. She 
kept rubbing her nose with her sleeve, artlessly, as though to 
suggest that she, an innocent, had no notion what might have 
brought these armed deserters unheralded to Three-Tent 
Square. Some warrior duty no doubt! And to all appearances 
there was nothing to cause alarm about these deserters, unless 
perhaps that one or two of them had planted Turkish bayonets 
on their rifles. But platoons of armed fighters were often to 
be seen about the camp on their way back from the trenches, 
or marching to them to take over. Today especially, since fir- 
ing continued in the north, there was nothing particularly 
surprising in the sight of a few armed men. When Aram came 
out of Iskuhi’s tent, the business had already begun. Yet for a 
while he watched in complete indifference. His mind, sullen 
and stupefied by his own unpardonable behaviour, merely 
supposed some order of Bagradian’s, which the warrior-band 
had come to fulfil. And what, since he was already cut off 

736 



from the people, did the defence of the Damlayik matter to 
him? 

But Shushik had sharper eyes. Her tall body filled the whole 
tent-door. She perceived at once what lurked in Sato’s conse- 
quential behaviour, her eccentric pointings again and again 
to the hanum’s tent. Shushik planted herself in the doorway. 
She spread her arms out, ready to keep off disaster with her 
body. 

The long-haired thief came out of the clustered pack. “We vc 
been sent to take away the food which you still keep.” 

“I know of no food.” 

“You must know of it. I mean the silver boxes with the 
fish, swimming in oil, the wine-jars, and the oatmeal.” 

“I know nothing of wine or oatmeal. Who sent you?” 

“What business is that of yours? The commandant.” 

“The commandant had better come himself.” 

“Well, come on — out of the way! I warn you for the last 
time, you silly bitch! You’re not going to be let squat here for 
ever with all that grub. It’s ours now.” 

Shushik said nothing more. She followed, with the eyes 
and hands of a wrestler, the movements of the long-haired 
thief, who, having cast away his rifle, was looking for the 
best attacking-pomt. So that when he tried to bear down on 
the giantess from the left, she had already gripped him round 
the middle; her iron hands lifted the miserable creature up 
and hurled him back among his fellows so violently that he 
tore two of them to earth with him The gigantic Shushik 
stood on as before, not even breathing a jot more quickly, her 
arms spread, waiting for the next. But before Shushik even 
knew she would die, she was dead. A sly attack, delivered side- 
ways with a rifle-butt, smashed in her skull. She died in a 
flash, at the very summit of her happiness, since even in these 
combative moments her heart was still brimful of the one 
feeling: Haik’s going to live. Her body, hurtling to the gtound, 
blocked the way to Stephan’s less happy mother. 

737 



And now Pastor Aram understood. With wild cries, bran- 
dishing his stick, he rushed on the pack, which at that instant, 
.scared by the murder, was drawing apart. Now Tomasian 
should have thrown his whole influence into the scales. He 
was the pastor, and one of the chiefs. But Aram had long since 
ceased to control himself. He did exactly what he should not 
have done — ^ran blindly upon them, striking, with his ridicu- 
lous stick, on all sides. The answer was a bayonet thrust, in 
the back, just under his right shoulder. 

What’s that, he thought, and what have I really to do with 
all this rabble? I am a man of God, the Word is entrusted to 
me to preach, nothing more. Let’s leave all these strangers to 
their devices. His stick had dropped out of his hand. But 
fully aware of his spiritual digmty, he squared his shoulders, 
turned away again, and went back stiffly. Ah, yes, the women 
there! Well? Had Iskuhi at last made up her mind? Had she 
decided to be obedient? But why was she dressed in white? 
Yes, they must live again in friendship with one another, just 
as in Zeitun. Hovsannah would see that for herself. The way 
to the third tent seemed uncommonly long. The pastor smiled 
encouragingly at his wife. But she seemed to look past him 
with terrified eyes. Just three paces from her Aram collapsed 
on the dry grass, staining it with his blood Though his wound 
was nothing much, he fainted Hovsannah cowered down over 
him, helpless, at a loss, her child in her arms. When Iskuhi 
saw the blood, she ran back screaming into the tent, brought 
clean linen and scissors, and knelt by her brother Only now 
did Hovsannah pull herself together and put down her 
suckling on the grass. They slit Aram’s coat. Iskuhi pressed 
the cloth with all her strength against his wound. Her right 
hand reddened with the blood of her brother, from whom she 
was for ever alienated. 

The long-haired thief, Sato, and a few deserters crowded 
over Shushik’s body into the hanum’s tent. Juliette, half- 
aroused from a heavy sleep, had heard the dispute, the shouts, 

738 



the scufflings. “The fever, thank Godl The fever back again!” 
she thought astutely. And even when the tent filled with 
stinking people, her lethargy could make stand against any 
fear. “Either it’s the fever, and then I’m delighted. But if it’s 
the Turks, it’s better it should come now, between sleep and 
sleep.” Nobody even thought of harming the hanum. They 
did not so much as notice the mvalid. Their one concern was 
to find those culinary treasures, of which envious fables had 
gone the rounds. They dragged the big wardrobe-trunk and 
the rest of the luggage outside the tent. There every box and 
chest in the sheikh-tent had already been piled. Only Sato 
and the long-haired thief stayed on for a moment with Juliette, 
the one because he hoped to find something useful on his own 
account, the other from mahee and curiosity. Since nothing 
more cruel occurred to her, Sato suddenly stripped the bed- 
clothes off Juliette. The man should see the stranger’s naked- 
ness! He meanwhile had picked up a big tortoise-shell comb, 
as a souvenir, no doubt to comb his own long, matted hair 
with It. Lost in his contemplation of this treasure, he whistled 
his way out of the tent without touching the woman. Outside, 
the pack had rummaged and rummaged in the contents of 
the many trunks. Juliette’s clothes and linen lay defiled, just 
as they had been by saptiehs in Yoghonoluk. The loot was 
miserably inadequate: two boxes of sardines, a tin of con- 
densed milk, three bars of chocolate, a tin of broken biscuits. 
That couldn’t be all! Quick, into the third tent! Sato gesticu- 
lated. But now the little cracked bell had begun to ring across 
from the altar square, summoning to the Mass of petition. 
This signal, prearranged with the other group, called the de- 
serters to the second half of their day’s work. They would 
have to hurry to get there in time. Each of them snatched up 
something, not to have to go off empty-handed — spoons and 
knives, a dish, and even a pair of women’s shoes. 

Iskuhi and Hovsannah had stanched the wound with their 
clothes. The pastor came to himself. He looked most surprised. 

739 



He could fiot realize what a mad dog had just been killed 
in him. No stubborn defiance forced him now to commit 
afresh the grave sm of cutting himself oS from his people. 
Blood had been spilt. This spilt blood was the grace that 
saved him from the test that had not yet taken place. He 
watched Hovsannah. She was cleaning her hands with grass 
tufts, so that her child’s swaddling<lothes might not be 
stained. Aram Tomasian felt surprised that a whole heap of 
rugs and cushions should have been thrust in behind his back, 
so that now he was sitting almost upright. Iskuhi, with her 
right hand, was still pressing the compress against his wound, 
and so prevented his lying back. Her thin, wasted face looked 
taut with the effort. Aram turned his head away and said: 
“Iskuhi," and, five or six times, only sighed out: “Iskuhi.” He 
spoke her name with the sound of a tender “Forgivel” 

The sacristan jerked at his httle bell like a lunatic. It swung 
from a pole beside the altar. These urgent peals were quite 
unnecessary, since the congregation of old men, women, and 
children had long since collected for Mass. But still, jerked 
fanatically by the sacristan, the httle bell pealed on and on, 
far and away across their heads, as though not only Turkish 
infantry, but land and sea, had been called to wimess that this 
was the hour of death for a Christian people. 

From a cord strung between poles right and left on the top 
step of the altar, the curtain strung on rings hung down, wait- 
ing to be drawn before the priest, as it is in the Armenian rite 
at the Consecration, when he is hidden from the eyes of the 
faithful. The heavy fabric of this curtain kept being blown 
against the altar. Between the gusts long, anxious stillness. 
Shots could be heard from the North Saddle. 

Ter Haigasun, in his presbytery-hut, next door to the gov- 
ernment-barrack, had long been vested for this Mass. The 
singers and deacons who were to serve it, had waited some 
time around the door for him. Yet a deep uneasiness still pre- 

740 



vented his coming forth to ascend the altar. What was this? 
His heart, which as a rule was not perturbed, thumped against 
his priestly robes. Did he fear the luiknown, which was now 
so close? 

Did he doubt if he had acted rightly in deciding to call 
dirccdy on the people at this moment of their crying need? 
Ter Haigasun’s lids fell heavily over his eyes. He saw him- 
self alone among the dead, in his stiff Mass robes. Horrible 
as It was, he had always known he would be the last of them. 
His heart had begun to beat more evenly. But in exchange he 
was filled with the indescribable sense of mortality, a surer 
expectation of death than he had known in the worst minutes 
of battle. 

One of the two assistant priests kept poking his head round 
the door of the presbytery-hut to warn him. It was long past 
Mass time; there was danger that the following general as- 
sembly might have to be prolonged till after nightfall. Yet 
sail Ter Haigasun could not manage to tear himself free. It 
was as if some inner power would not let him go, as it strove 
to prevent this Mass of petition. Giddiness and weakness 
threatened to force him full length on the bed. He was ill, 
famished. Should he cancel the Mass, or let another priest 
say it instead of him? Ter Haigasun perceived that this time 
It was not weakness, but his fear of being unequal to the task 
which today lay before him. And something else, something 
vague. He stood up at last and gave the sign. The acolyte 
took up the tall cross to carry it on ahead of the procession. 
Slowly, with joined hands and downcast eyes, Ter Haigasun 
followed deacons and singers. That sacerdotal, inward-turning 
glance, as he passed on his way through dividing crowds as in- 
differently as though he had walked between bushes, was still 
aware of it all, with the sharpest intensity. Ter Haigasun had 
not more than fifty paces to reach the altar. Yet, with each of 
these, the spiritual state of the people round him seemed to 
pierce him hke a radiating agony. That morning’s lethargy 

741 



had dissolved, replaced by restlessness and excitement. Human 
nature, in this ;^al hour, had drawn up out of itself some 
last reserve or show of energy. The smallest children especially 
were becoming most artfully unmanageable. They kept bel- 
lowing with all their strength, throwing themselves flat on the 
ground. It was perhaps the swollen pain in their small belhes. 
Their angry mothers shook and slapped, since that was the 
only way to quiet them. Some grown-ups were just as rest- 
less. These were old men — mostly the familiar “small owners” 
— who launched out into long, rambling speeches, not stopping 
respectfully, as they once had, when the priest came past them 
to the altar. Ter Haigasun perceived that demoralization had 
kept pace with hunger. “A good thing,” he reflected, “that the 
decads won’t be coming to this meeting. As long as they hold 
out, all IS not lost.” In the midst of which consoling reflection 
he raised his eyes and stood for an instant, rooted. What did 
It mean? Armed men in the congregation! Singly, to be sure, 
or in little groups, but in any case in the flattest contradiction 
to his and Bagradian’s definite order. Who had sent these 
men out of their trenches? Since now the women had con- 
quered that morning’s lethargy well enough to put on their 
Sunday best for this Mass, the brown streaks these warriors 
made were lost in the brightness of the whole. Ter Haigasun 
saw with his next glance that these were not trusted men 
from the nearer sectors, but deserters from the South Bastion, 
those strangers to the valley of Yo^onoluk, always kept on 
the farthest edge of the people, who luckily scarcely ever came 
into camp, and never to Mass. Were they grown pious sud- 
denly? Ter Haigasun turned his head sharply to the 
government-barrack on his right. Where was the guard? Oh, 
yes, of course. Bagradian had needed everyone, some reservists 
even, in the trenches. Turn back* it flashed into his mind. 
Make some excusel Put off this Mass! Send for BagradianI 
Call together the mukhtars! Take precautionary measures! 
But, in spite of these reflections, he still kept on, in silent, 

742 



hesitant steps. There, close round the altar, stood the notables^ 
the mukhtars and their wives and daughters, those lines of 
grey, respected heads, m the order in which they had always 
gathered, in church, in the valley. 

As to Gabriel Bagradian, he had promised to be in time 
for this Mass, but something must have made him unpunctual. 
As the lines of village elders drew apart to make a lane for 
the procession. Ter Haigasun’s soul got its second warning. 
Between an unknown deserter and Sarkis Kilikian, HranJ 
Oskanian stood, hemmed in like a man under arrest. Again 
Ter Haigasun had the feehng that he must stop and sharply 
turn on the exiled teacher. “What’s all this? What have you 
to tell me. Teacher Oskanian?” And again Ter Haigasun went 
on, scarcely lifting his eyes, guided by some power, or power- 
lessness, which now, for the first time on the Damlayik, sapped 
his strong will. 

His foot on the first altar step, he remembered that he had 
forgotten Nokhudian’s letter, left it behind in the presbytery- 
hut. This wrought in him excessive confusion. The forgotten 
screed and these ill-omens shook him so that it lasted a sheer 
eternity before he climbed on up to the tabernacle. The peo- 
ple behind seemed to sense acutely the wandering thoughts 
and feebleness of their priest, since now children’s howls, rest- 
less shufflings, importunate gossip, grew every instant more 
unabashed. And into such hollow hearts as these the fervent 
spirit must seek to force itself, which was to pray down God’s 
miracle from the skies! Ter Haigasun turned in agony. As he 
did so, Gabriel Bagradian came hurrying breathless into the 
square and stood in the first row. For a second he felt re- 
lieved. Behind his back the choir had begun the anthem. It 
was a short respite; he closed his eyes. Tired, hollow voices 
rose to the sky: 

“Thou Who extendest Thy creating arms to the stars. 

Give our arms strength. 

That they, held out, may reach unto Thee. 

743 



"By means of the crown of the brow, crown ^so the 
Deck the senses with prayer. 

With Aaron’s blossoming, golden robe. 

“We, as all the angels of God resplendent 
Are panoplied, robed about in Love, 

To serve the secret, the holiest.” 

The choir was silent. Ter Haigasun stared at the little silver 
ewer which the deacon held for him. He dipped his fingers 
and kept them so long in the water that at last the astonished 
deacon drew it away from him. Only then did he half turn 
to the faithful, to make the sign of the cross above them, three 
times. He turned back to the altar and raised his hands. 

Ter Haigasun's being stood divided. One part of him, the 
celebrating priest, went through the prescribed and ancient 
ritual of this exceptional service of petition, scarcely delaying 
a response. The other part was m several layers; it was an ex- 
hausted struggler, putting out his last ounce of strength, so that 
the priest might still be able to do his office. First and fore- 
most this second Ter Haigasun carried on the struggle against 
his body. It warned, with every word of the liturgy: “So far, 
no further! Haven’t you noticed that I’ve not a drop of blood 
left in my head? Another minute, another two, and I may 
shame you, by collapsing here at the altar.” With only his 
body to contend against, the fight could easily have been won. 
But far wilier enemies lurked behind it. One of these was a 
juggler, perpetually shifting the sacred vessels here and there, 
before the eyes of the priest. Suddenly the tall silver candle- 
sticks had become fixed bayonets. From the finely printed page 
of the missal there leapt the names of the dead in the parish 
register, crossed off with huge red pened crosses, drawn over 
everything. A gust of wind from time to time scampered 
through the leaves in the leaf-screen, behind the altar, and 
these dead leaves, eddying past, settled irreverently on the 
tabernacle, on the gospds stamped with the golden cross. Ter 

744 



Haigasun, the celdirant, reached the psalm. His entirely sepa- 
rated voice was intoning: 

"Judge me, O God, and plead my cause . . 

The deacon sighed the response: “Against an ungodly na- 
tion: O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.” 

“Why dost Thou cast me off? why go I mourning because 
of the oppression of the enemy?” 

“Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceed- 
ing joy.” 

Whilst Ter Haigasun conunued this long alternation of re- 
sponses, impeccably to the end, with the deacon, his eyes 
showed the other Ter Haigasun mtolerable sights. Those dead 
leaves, strewn over everything, were not dead leaves, but dirt, 
dung, some kind of indescribable filth, scattered about the 
altar by God’s enemies, by criminals. No other explanation 
was possible, since dirt cannot ram down from heaven. Ter 
Haigasun stared at the missal to avoid this horrid sight of 
desecration.'But had not the people seen it too? And here he 
made his first mistake in the text. 

The deacon had sung: “My Almighty God, keep us, and 
forgive us our sms.” 

Now the priest should have given his response. But the priest 
was silent. The deacon turned wide-eyed to the choir. And, 
since still Ter Haigasun did not raise his voice, he came a 
step towards him and whispered sharply; “In the house of the 
most holy . . .” 

The priest seemed to hear nothing. And now the deacon 
whispered in desperation, half aloud: “In the house of the 
most holy, and m the place . . .” 

Ter Haigasun woke. 

“In the house of the most holy and m the place of songs of 
praise; m this dwelling of angels, this place of repentance of 
men, we prostrate ourselves before the resplendent and glorious 
sign of this God, in reverence, and pray . . .” 

Ter Haigasun drew a deep breath. Under his mitre sweat 

745 



streamed down his neck, stood out on his forehead. He dared 
not wipe it away. And behind him there ascended the nasal 
voice of Asayan, the chief chorister: 

“In this consecrated place of sacrifice, in this temple, we are 
gathered together, for praise and prayer . . .” 

Asayan’s voice rasped Ter Haigasun as never before. Christ 
help me I Ter Haigasun stared in agony at the altar crucifix. 
The voice of one of the beings who composed him warned: 
“Don’t look away from it.” But this very warning made him 
look away, further out, to the high screen of beech-leaves 
which shut off the altar. Someone stood there leaning against 
the framework, with folded arms, smoking a cigarette. 
Unheard-of insolence! Ter Haigasun swallowed down this 
interjection. In the next instant this somebody had ceased to 
be Sarkis Kilikian, whom he loathed, whom he had put in 
irons; this somebody was, for the time being, nobody. The 
screen confronted him, empty. But then the Russian came 
back, to turn into all possible kinds of people— once he even 
seemed to be Krikor — ^till at last a priest in Mass vestments 
stood there. And at first it seemed ridiculous to Ter Haigasun 
that the robed priest should really be himself. Nor was it he, 
since he wore no soldier’s lambskin kepi, but a mitre em- 
broidered with gold 

“Blessing and praise to the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost ” 

He could get no further. Between him and the shape against 
the leaf-screen, his own detached voice dinned in his ears: 
“Why do you stand about fooling in broad daylight? What 
good is this Mass of petition?” 

Ter Haigasun watched the ascending cloud of incense. But 
his own voice, and the shape against the leaves, persisted: 
“What a devil this God of yours must be, to ordain a year 
hke this for His pious Armemans." 

Ter Haigasun had begun the ritual vesper: “Almighty God, 

746 



holy and eternal, have mercy on us. Keep us from temptation 
and all its arrows.” 

And now the answer seemed not to come from Kilikian, 
but solely out of his own heart: “You don’t believel You don’t 
believe in any miracle! You know quite well that, this time 
tomorrow, four and a half thousand Armenian corpses will be 
lying all over the Damlayik.” 

The deacon gave Ter Haigasun the thurible, so that he 
might give incense to the people. Intense, causeless thirst as- 
sailed him. Now no one was leaning against the screen. 

But the voice was as close as ever: “You’d like to kill me. 
Kill me, if you have the pluck to do it.” 

The thurible crashed out of the priest’s hand. That second 
produced an entirely new Ter Haigasun. With barbarian 
shouts he snatched up one of the heavy silver candlesticks and 
brandished it high. But to fell his enemy he rushed, not on the 
shape before the leaf-screen, no, but into the midst of his con- 
gregation. 

Without this attack of delirium, brought on by hunger, there 
would probably have been no “putsch.” Even the deserters in 
the South Bastion were Armemans, full of respect and fear 
for the altar. But the long-haired thief had collected his troops 
round the government-hut, ready to storm. When the tumult 
rose, at the end of the altar square, he took that for the signal. 
Ten of his people, with a view to producing the necessary 
chaos, began firing in the air. The others bashed in the doors, 
found the munition supplies, and in a few seconds had dragged 
them out before the hut. What happened on the altar steps 
happened with such dreamy quickness that neither Gabriel 
nor the mukhtars were quite aware of the incident. Its dreamy 
quality was the essential thing, and not the quickness, since 
perhaps it took a good two minutes. When Ter Haigasun, 
brandishing his candlestick, had hurled himself into the midst 

747 



at his faithful, general confusion had set in. People had dashed 
in all directions. Gabriel caught a glimpse of the priest, strug' 
gling through the crowd to reach some deserters. He, too, had 
not known who it was had invited the pack to this Mass and 
assembly. Ter Haigasun seemed to be looking for a definite 
individual. In the next instant he was surrounded, hemmed 
in by armed men. They wrenched his candlestick away from 
him, pushed him about from one to another with loud cries, 
in the end tore him to the ground. Then shots clattered down 
on the rear of the crowd. People rushed apart with mad howls 
of terror. The yammering mukhtars tried to run into shelter 
with their wives. Gabriel, with drawn revolver, forced his 
way into the melee to free Ter Haigasun. A deserter, follow- 
ing close behind him, brought down his riile-butt, with all 
his strength, on Gabriel’s skull. Gabriel collapsed. Had this 
crack on the head smashed his sun-helmet, it would have 
been all over with him. But the rifle-butt did no more than 
drive the tough cork helmet far down on his face, and the 
savagery of the stroke was mitigated. Gabriel fell stunned, not 
really wounded. Others had meanwhile roped Ter Haigasun 
with strong hemp cords to one of the corner posts of the altar- 
frame, driven deep into the ground. The priest struggled with 
astonishing vigour, but m silence. If he had had the knife, 
which as a rule he carried in his cassock-pocket, he would 
have finished oil one rascal at least. The mukhtars stood a long 
way off, quaking and moamng. They had not even the 
strength to run for safety. And their wives and daughters, 
with inhuman screechmgs, tugged them back. The crowd still 
understood nothing. Half-crazed now by the crackling rifle- 
fire, it stampeded forward to the altar. But since, as they came 
there, the front lines were trying to get back, there arose an 
unholy vortex of terrified bodies, yelping with fear and pain. 
Already some of the worst deserters, who for months past had 
not touched a woman, were dartmg in from the outer edge of 
it, like cuttlefish, to grip in their dirty claws here a woman 

748 



and there a girl. Another more sober group stormed the hut 
to plunder the wretchcdest poverty. 

Meanwhile there were signs of resistance. Some determined 
people pressed forwards to free Ter Haigasun. Two minutes 
more, and perhaps the square might have run with blood since, 
threatened with superior numbers, the criminals were ahead) 
loading their guns. But fate, run mad, again surpassed herself, 
The wind blew up in a sudden gust, as it had so often in these 
last days, a whirlwind sweeping round the square. Since no 
one any longer watched the altar, the wooden lights and a vase 
of flowers were blown down. Ter Haigasun sull tugged si- 
lently at the thick cords which lashed him to the altar-frame. 
From time to time he stopped to get up fresh strength, and, 
with every jerk, the frame swayed. His bloodshot eyes looked 
round for the other priests, the singers, Asayan the sacristan. 
They had all run off, or else dared not venture too near their 
superior, who was being guarded by deserters, no doubt to 
give plunderers of munitions their chance to get away in peace. 
Among those deserters around the altar stood Sarkis Kilikian. 
He watched with interest Ter Haigasun’s attempts to wriggle 
free, not, if seemed, personally concerned in any of these in- 
cidents and fortunes, but merely inquisitive. After a umc he 
slouched away. His weary-looking back seemed to be saying: 
“I’ve had quite enough of this. And it’s about time." But 
scarcely was Kilikian out of sight when the terrible thing 
began to happen Later Ter Haigasun connected Kilikian with 
this fire, merely because his disappearance coincided so strik- 
ingly with its outbreak. But in reality the Russian merely 
passed along the altar steps, not even touching the screen of 
leaves, about three feet behind the altar-frame. The jet of 
flame which now leapt skywards was at least three times as 
high as the plaited leaf-screen. A puff of wind from the sea 
turned it inwards at once, and spread it wide, on the right. 
Winged tongues of fire and scattering sparks detached them- 
selves, to leap on to the roof of the nearest hut. This hut was 

749 



Thomas Kebussyan’s solid residence, with the inscription on 
the door “Town Hall.” The fire at first seemed to set to work 
rather gingerly, as though it had a bad conscience to surmount. 
But when the twig-roof of the mayoral residence had begun 
in the next minute to crackle and flame, there was no more 
holdmg it. As a row of lamps lights up on a city boulevard, 
so did this conflagration dart round the square, flaring up out 
of nearly every hut simultaneously. The gang may have lit 
some of these fires, to hold people back and to cover their 
retreat. And now a banner of flame waved above the 
government-barrack. One thing only remained certain, that 
these criminals, as the fire began, had rid the Town Enclosure 
of their presence. 

When, with alarming suddenness, the leaf-screen sprang into 
flame above the altar, the crowd had burst asunder like a shell. 
Everyone forgot the criminals, no one so much as thought of 
the altar, with its bound priest, and the many presumabl) 
dead. With queer, almost whimpering noises, the people 
rushed down their lines of huts. No hope I Nothing to put it 
out with! Only — ^let them save what was to be saved! The 
essentials of life. It seemed not to occur to anyone to ask: “Is 
It worth while?” But the mukhtars, the village notables, those 
doddering ancients so palsied with terror a minute ago, so 
lamed with fear as to be quite unable to help Ter Haigasun, 
had suddenly legs. Their money was burning! The lovely, 
well-smoothed-out pound notes which they had stored in 
corners of the huts, under their bedding, waited forlorn for 
rescuing hands. The old men, with their wives and daughters, 
went scurrying homewards. 

One last, violent wrench, and then Ter Haigasun ceased to 
struggle. The rough cords, through the stiff silk of his vest- 
ments, had taken the skin off his arms and chest. Ice-cold 
sweat poured down his spine. Flakes of blazing wood kept 
falhng over the altar, which had partly already begun to burn. 
Now and again, these flaming embers scorched the priest. 

750 



His hair and beard were already singed by them. The heavy 
altar curtain blazed in a sheet of flame. So be it I The square 
was empty. Screeching famihes pranced round their fl am ing 
huts. Why call for help? A priest who dies a martyr, lashed to 
his altar, has earned sure forgiveness of his sms. A jet of loose 
flame scourged past Ter Haigasun. If only the Turks had been 
his assassinsl Why his own people! Armenians' Dogs' Wild 
dogs! Dogs! A bellowing rage, which threatened to burst his 
head, broke out of him. Wailings of despair from round the 
huts. But when Ter Haigasun’s furious shout, “Dogs! Dogs!” 
went howling across the square, it startled the money-grubbers, 
who left their vanity, ran to the altar to untie their priest 
Before the first of them had reached him, the loosened post 
gave way and the frame crashed down in a burst of fire. The 
priest fell forward. They picked him up. Quickly cut his 
bonds. Ter Haigasun could go a few steps, but was soon 
forced to he on the ground. 

Bedros Hekim came out at the right minute, just tis a few 
old men and women were taking pity on Gabriel, still uncon- 
scious. The doctor saw at once, before he had even felt his 
pulse, that Gabriel was still alive. With many groans old 
Altouni sat and took Gabriel’s head on his knees. Cautiously 
he loosened the cork helmet, which the rifle-butt had driven 
so far down as to cover the eyes. The instant they were free 
Gabriel opened them. He thought he had only been asleep. 
All this had happened in some unbelievably short time — ^in an 
interval “outside time,” so to speak. First he gradually felt 
the burning weight of his own skull. The doctor lightly 
fingered over his scalp. No blood. Only a huge lump. But 
perhaps the stroke had done inner damage, burst a vein in the 
forehead. Bedros gently spoke Gabriel's name. 

Gabriel stared incredulously and smiled. “What’s been hap- 
pemng here.?” 

Bedros Hekim laughed shordy. “If only I knew that my 
seL^ my son.” 


75 * 



Tenderljr he tcx^ Gabriel’s checks between his brown and 
shrivelled hands. “Anyway, nothing’s happened to you, I 
know that now.” 

Gabriel sprang to his feet. He refused at first to use his 
memory. He just managed to say in a drunken voice: “What 
about that surprise attack? . . . Have we made it? Jesus 
Christ, the South Bastion. . . . Now we’re done for. . . .” 

But Ter Haigasun, too, was on his feet again. And his voice 
seemed to issue from another drunkenness, a clear, super- 
conscious intoxication: “Now, no morel” 

Bagradian did not hear him. The crackling and roaring 
was too loud to hear oneself speak. The fire ate its way step 
by step from hut to hut. And groups of trees on the edge of 
the Town Enclosure were already bright with flames. More 
and more families, with their arms full of rescued goods and 
chattels, had collected on the altar square, awaiting an order, 
an objective. Some of the women had used their last ounce of 
strength to bring their sewing-machines into safety. All eyes 
sought the leaders But there were none, since both Bagradian 
and Ter Haigasun were still absently staring out at nothing in 
a kind of coma. And Dr. Altouni didn’t count. No mukhtar, 
no teacher, showed himself; they were all too busy saving their 
property. 

In this desperate pause there came at least help from the 
North Saddle. It is some proof of the uncanny quickness of 
these proceedings, the interval from Ter Haigasun’s outbreak 
to this instant, that Avakian with ten decads only now put in 
an appearance, when all was over. Chaush Nurhan had sent at 
once to fetch him, the instant the deserters began to fire. 

Avakian came running in horror to Gabriel. “Are you 
wounded, Efiendi? . . . Jesus Christ, what’s the matter? . . . 
Your face! . . . Say something, please. . . .” 

Bui Gabriel Bagradian said nothing. In a few quick steps 
past the flaming altar, he left the square, the Town Enclosure, 
broke into a run, and stopped at last on the summit of a httle 

753 



hilL Avakian followed without a word. Gabriel strained his 
head forward, listening sharply, trying to hear through the 
crackling Same. A long-drawn rattle of bullets in the south. 
Machine-gims? And now again! But perhaps it was only de- 
ception, since the pain m his head threatened to burst it 



The Script in the Fog 

The junior officer had managed to discharge his impossible 
duty. He had laid down a field-telephone, not of course as far 
as Villa Bagradian — ^there was probably not enough wire in 
the whole Fourth Army to do that' — ^but at least as far as the 
village of Habaste, about four hundred feet below the South 
Bastion. It was a meritorious piece of service, considering how 
badly his men were trained and the many difficulties presented 
by the rocky terrain. General Ah Risa Bey, disguised in mufti 
for the benefit of observers on the Damlayik, had come in per- 
son to Habaste. The sun had just set when the primitive tele- 
phone on the little field-table before him began to buzz. It 
lasted a very long time, and there was still much surmount- 
ing of technical difficulties before, at the other end of the wire, 
the voice of the yus-bashi became audible. 

“General, I have to report, we’ve taken the mountain.” 

Ali Risa Bey, he of the clear, unmuddied countenance, the 
non-smoker and teetotaler, leant back in his little folding-chair, 
holding up the earpiece: “The mountain, Yus-Bashi? How do 
you mean^ You mean the south end of the mountain?” 

“Quite so, Effendi, the south end.” 

“Thanks. Any losses?” 

“None at all, not a single man.” 

“And how many prisoners, Yus-Bashi?” 

A technical defect became apparent The general glanced 
keenly at the telephone officer. But soon the yus-bashi’s voice 
could be heard again, though not quite so distinct. 

734 



‘Tve taken no prisoners. The enemy trenches were empty. 
We’d thought they might be. Nearly empty. Only about ten 
men, counting, that is, four boys among them.” 

“And what’s been done with all these people?” 

“Our fellows disposed of them.” 

“They defended themselves?” 

“No, General.” 

“That considerably lessens your success, Yus-Bashi. These 
prisoners might have saved us a lot of trouble.” 

Even in this clumsy earpiece the major’s wrath was still 
perceptible. 

"It wasn’t I gave the order.” 

The general’s fervid coolness remained unruffled. “And 
what’s become of all those deserters?” 

“We only found the dregs of them, nobody else.” 

“I see. Anything more to report, Yus-Bashi?” 

“The Armenians have set fire to their camp. It looks like a 
considerable blaze. . . .” 

“And what docs that mean, in your opinion, Yus-Bashi? 
What reasons do you suppose they have for doing it?” 

The yus-bashi’s voice, revengefully acrimonious: “It’s not for 
me to judge that. General. You’ll know all that better than 
I do. Fellows may be wanting to clear off the mountain, in 
the night. . . .” 

For two seconds, with pale grey eyes, Ali Risa Bey stared 
silently at distances. He gave his opinion; “Possibly. . . . But 
there may be some feint at the back of it. . . . That ring- 
leader of theirs has had the best of our officers several times. 
. . . They may have planned a sortie.” 

He turned to his surrounding officers. “All outpost hnes m 
the valley to be thoroughly strengthened tonight.” 

The yus-bashi’s voice came somewhat impatiently: “Any 
further orders, please. General?” 

“How far have your companies got?” 

"The third company and two machine-gun groups sue 

755 



holding the nearest mound, about five hundred paces away 
from my base.” 

“We’ve been hearing machine-gun fire down here. What’s 
the meamng of that.^” 

“Only a little demonstration.” 

“That demonstration was highly deleterious and unneces- 
sary. Your men are to remain where they are and take proper 
cover.” 

The voice at the other end had now become spitefully astute: 
“My men to remain where they arc. May I have that, please, 
as a written order, Eflendi? . . . And tomorrow?” 

“Tomorrow, half an hour before sunrise, the artillery to 
open fire from the north. Set your watch exactly by mine, 
please, Yus-Bashi. . . . Good. ... I shall be up there with 
you ]ust before sunrise and lead the business from the south. 
. . . Thank you.” 

As he banged down the receiver, the yus-bashi bared his 
teeth. “So he’ll come along up in time for the walk-over, the 
goat’s-milk pasha! And then he’ll be ‘the victor of Musa 
Dagh’l” 

Gabriel turned back silently to the altar square. All the short 
way back he gripped Avakian’s hand. The fire had eaten its 
way further and further along the streets. The sun had not 
long been down. But, in spite of surrounding flames — the leaf- 
screen of the altar was still blazing — the world kept darken- 
ing around Gabriel. Black, miserable shapes, voices of black 
desolation, eddied round the square in meaningless arabesques. 
The scales of Gabriel’s whole hfe tottered. Had he not fully 
earned the right to let himself collapse a second time, this time 
for ever, and know no more^ Stephan was dead. Why start all 
over again? And yet, second by second, his splitting head 
began to fill with ever more luad, purposeful thoughts. 

Ter Haigasun, too, had recovered and scrambled to his 
feet. His first thought had been to pile his vestments, his torn 

756 



afi>> tbe stole, and all the rest in a careful heap. He covered his 
own nakedness with a rug which someone had lent him. A 
strand of Ter Haigasun's beard had been singed away, and 
a large red burn covered his cheek. His face looked entirely 
different. Those yellowish, hollow cheeks, the colour of 
cameos, were suffused with some dark flush of fever and rage. 
He struggled in vain for words at the sight of Gabriel. 

The people had ceased to struggle against the blaze. What 
energy they still had was barely enough to impel their crazy 
eddyings round the square, and these, little by little, ceased. 
Nor could the decads, sent by Nurhan, save anything more 
for them. They stood idle, watching the flames, which seemed 
not only to leap from outside upon the huts, but to burst from 
within them. The crackling roofs of leaves and branches were 
lifted, while puffs of wind drove fiery scraps across the sky. 
Soon the whole camp was squatting close on the bare earth of 
the big square, women, children, old men. These famished 
people could move no more. Firelight flickered across their 
earthy faces; the eyes showed no sign that they were aware of 
it. Their attitudes expressed only one desire: that no leader 
should ask them to stir another inch, raise another hand, or 
show the least sign of fresh activity. Here they would squat, 
awaiting the end without further resistance. That state which 
might be described as the “peace of annihilation” had come 
upon them. 

But these shrivelled souls, these wasted bodies, were to be 
roused again from this comfortable understanding with death, 
Behind closed eyelids Gabriel had collected his thoughts. It 
happened almost against his will. At first he even struggled 
to escape the very painful effort it needed to concentrate. Then, 
it was as though, in that echoing mine which was now his 
head, not he, Bagradian, was thinking, but, apart, independ- 
ently of himself, the task he had assumed, long ago in the 
valley, the task of carrying on this defence to its last possi- 
bility. An unbribable, implacable power went on calculating 

757 



Had the last possible hope been lost? No. The Turks had 
apparently occupied the ^uth Bastion. They had brought up 
machine-guns. The camp was on fire. What was to happen? 
A new line of defence, which should block their way as well 
as might be. Above all, the people must be cleared off the 
heights, they must be moved down on to the shore. Then to 
the howitzers! 

Avakian approached. Gabriel called to him: “What are you 
still doing here? Quick, go to Nurhan' He’s not to move from 
where he is! All the decads I chose for the attack to come 
here at once. And half the scouts group and the orderlies. 
We’ve got to form another line, with at least head cover.” 

Avakian hesitated, tried to ask questions Gabriel pushed 
him away and went into the midst of the somnolent multitude. 
“Why are you in despair, brothers and sisters? No need for 
that! We’ve still got seven hundred fighters and rifles, and 
our two big guns. You needn’t worry! It’d be better for the 
defence if the communes would set up their camp down on 
the shore for tonight. The men of the reserve to stop with 
me. 

By this time even the mukhtars had come to themselves. 
Ter Haigasun ordered them each to collect his village and 
lead It down the path to the shore He himself would go on, 
and find the best camping-grounds. The priest, there could be 
no doubt, was in high fever, and had to make a tremendous 
effort to turn back to life and to his duty. His face with the 
singed beard looked shrunken and dark. 

He turned to Gabriel. “To punish is the most important of 
all! You must shoot down the culprits, Bagradian!” 

Gabriel stared at him in silence. '7 won’t find Kihkian,” 
he thought. By degrees the comatose people had struggled up 
again. A drunken, lurching confusion had begun. The 
mukhtars, the village priests, two of the teachers, herded and 
shoved them into groups. No one resisted. Even the children 
no longer howled. Bedros Hekim stole away unobtrusively, 

758 



to bring at least those patients in the two hospitals into salety 
who could still move. Disaster gave this falling wreck of an 
old man the strength of a giant. 

Gabriel left it to Ter Haigasun to break up the camp. Not 
another second must be lost, since who could tell how far the 
Turks, even in the dark, might not dare to advance.? The 
howitzers were in danger. And another danger was the pack 
of scoundrelly deserters. Forward! Now it was not a question 
of thinkmg things out from A to Z, but of simple, blindly 
resolute action. Gabriel mustered together all the armed and 
half-armed men around him, the young and the old. Even 
htde boys had to come along The wind had fallen, it was 
quiet. The sharp pungence of smoke enveloped them. With it 
mingled the stink of singeing cloth. They could scarcely 
breathe, and their eyes were streaming. Gabriel gave the 
signal to move off. He and Shatakhian, who meanwhile had 
been routed out, went on ahead of the widely extended lines 
Exhausted men plodded after them, a hundred and fifty, a 
third of whom were sixty years old. And this wretched, fam- 
ished troop were to turn back victoriously four infantry com- 
panies at war-strength, commanded by a major, four captains, 
eight first lieutenants? It was a good thing that Gabriel did 
not realize the enemy’s strength. 

On their way to the howitzers they passed the big new grave- 
yard. The graveyard folk had followed their custom in the 
valley and taken up their quarters beside the dead. And now 
Nunik, Wartuk, Manushak, and all the others bestirred them- 
selves to cram their tight sacks with mouldy gear. Sato assisted 
them. This fresh migration seemed to make little difference to 
these folk. The two newest graves were Stephan’s and Knkor’s. 
Krikor had asked that his grave should not be picked out by 
any inscription. A rough wooden cross had been planted on 
Stephan’s mound. His father went stiffly past, without a glance 
at it. Now it was night. But the red glow of the blaze over- 
arched the Damlayik. It might have been a huge city on fire, 

759 



and not a few hundred huts of twisted branches, a few dumps 
of trees. 

Midway, however, as the grassy knoll of the howitzer em- 
placement came into sight, something unexpected happened. 
Gabriel and Shatakhian stopped. The plodding men behind 
them flung themselves down. Down the slope ran a line of 
r’flemen. Only their black silhouettes were visible as they 
waved rifles frantically at the oncomers, Turks? The men 
sought what cover they could in the dark. But the black shapes, 
outlined by a flickering red sky, were advancing timidly. 
About thirty of them. Gabriel noticed that they were pushing 
a bound man on in front of them. He went forward to meet 
them. They earned lanterns. Five paces off, he saw that Sarkis 
Kilikian was their prisoner. They were deserters. They flung 
themselves down flat on their faces and touched the ground 
with their foreheads, the most primitive of all gestures of self- 
abasement. What was there still to say or justify? Their way 
out was barred. These ropes with which they had bound 
Kilikian were their proof that they regretted thtir heinous 
deed, had brought a scapegoat, were ready to suffer any 
punishment. Some, with an almost childish eagerness, heaped 
up their plunder at Gabriel’s feet — cartridges stolen from the 
armoury stores plundered from the tents. But Gabriel saw only 
Kilikian. They had forced him down to his knees, his head 
flung backwards. In this flickering twilight the features of his 
face were quite visible. Those indifferent eyes as little ex- 
pressed the wish to live as the wish to die. Impassively they 
watched their judge. Bagradian bent a little nearer this grue- 
somcly impassive face. Not even now could he rid his mind 
of the tinge of liking and respect which he felt whenever 
he saw the Russian. Was Kihkian, that spectral observer, the 
real culprit? What if he was! Gabriel clicked back the catch 
of the service-revolver in his pocket. He set it to the Rus- 
sian’s forehead swiftly. The first shot missed fire. Nor had 
Kilikian shut his eyes. His mouth and nostrils were twitching. 

760 



It iwas like a suppressed smile. But it felt to Gabriel as though 
he had turned the unspent bullet against himself. When he 
pressed the trigger again, he was so weak that he had to turn 
his head away. So died Sarkis Kilikian — after an incompre- 
hensible life in many jails, having escaped Turkish massacre 
as a child, and, as a man, a Turkish hnng-party, to end at 
last by the bullet of a fellow-countryman. 

' Gabriel signed quickly to the others to fall in with the 
men behind. 

Two of these repentant scarecrows had zealously spied out 
the Turkish positions. What they had to report was an exag- 
geration of hard reality. Perhaps their own miserable fear of 
punishment may have caused them to distort the already 
formidable; perhaps they tried to dimmish their own guilt by 
describing a gigantic enemy power. Since how, even without 
this monstrous crime of theirs, could the few South Bastion 
defenders ever have resisted the sly envelopment by the Turks? 
Gabriel looked past them in silence. He was aware that he 
himself was largely responsible for their crime. He had not 
taken Nurhan’s warning to redistribute these rascals in other 
decads. 

Samuel Avakian and the men of the surpnse-attackers had 
joined Gabriel some time previously. It was an hour before 
these few straggling skirmishers, in two lines, disposed them- 
selves diagonally across the mound and in the many hollows 
of the plateau to the zone of bushes, and in among the rocks. 
Even the best fighters of the north trenches had come to the 
end of their strength. What could one ask of elderly reservists ? 
Each man lay like a log where he had been told to lie, half 
awake, half asleep. The order to pile up stones and earth as 
head-cover was scarcely obeyed. When Gabriel had passed 
from man to man, down the whole length of this utterly hope- 
less front, and posted a few stray pickets in advance of it, he 
went off to the howitzers. He had every square inch of the 

761 



Datniayik in his head, every distance, the lie of all its ground. 
For the area of the South Bastion he could check his ballistic 
elements by his notebook. 

This was the first autumn night, after a day of grilhng 
desert heat. It was suddenly cooL Gabriel sat alone beside the 
howitzers, having sent their men to get some sleep. Avakian 
spread out a rug for him. But he did not wrap himself into 
it, since his body was hot all over, and his head, grown far 
too light, was threatening to fiy away from it. Gabriel stretched 
himself out, neither sleeping nor waking. He stared up at the 
red flat lake in the sky. That red mirror of conflagration 
seemed to deepen and broaden out as he lay and watched it. 
How long has the altar been on fire.? The melodious question 
kept repeating itself. Then, for some long time, he must have 
known nothing more about himself, since something in his 
neighbourhood waked him up. It was not a hand nor a voice, 
only something near him. But this very sensation of being 
waked, this long, fabulous instant of deepest experience, was so 
materially soothing in its effect that he struggled against any 
fuller consciousness. His exhausted umty with this presence 
was so complete, in this one short instant, that Iskuhi’s reality 
almost deceived. Since she, after all, brought back the in- 
evitable. The sight of her made him think, with a start, of 
Juhette. It was an age since he had seen his wife or thought 
of her. His first scared inquiry was therefore this: “And 
Juliette? What’s happened to Juliette.?’’ 

It had taken all Iskuhi’s faihng strength to drag so far. 
For her, all these recent happenings had fused mto some- 
thing indistinct. She was aware only of the one persistent, 
burning question: “Why doesn’t he come? Why has he left 
me? Why hasn’t he sent for me at the last?” And now those 
questions were coldly throttled by the inquiry about Juliette 
She said nothing, and it took her a long time to collect hex 
thoughts for a hesitant account of all that had taken place on 
Thrcc-Tcnt Square: the raid, Shushik’s death, Tomasian’s 

762 



wound. Bedros had tried in vain to persuade Juliette to let 
Kevork carry her down to the seashore. Juliette would have 
no such thing and had screamed that she wasn’t going to leave 
her tent. The wounded Aram also lay on, in his. . . . 

Gabriel stared up at the flat red sky. It had become no paler. 
“It’s all right as it IS. . . . Nothing will happen before morn* 
ing. . . . Time enough. ... A night in the open might kill 
Juliette. . . .’’ 

Something in these words hurt Gabriel. He switched on his 
electric torch. But now the last used-up battery gave out 
scarcely as much light as a glow-worm. In spite of the tragic 
red above him, and flames still shooting up m the Town En- 
closure, this night felt darker than all former ones. He could 
scarcely sec Iskuhi beside him. Softly he felt about for her 
face, and started, so cold and thin were her cheeks and hands. 
Kindness moved him. 

He took the rug and wrapped her into it. “How long is it 
since you ate anything, Iskuhi?” 

“Mairik Antaram had brought us something before it hap- 
pened,” she lied. “I’ve had enough. . . .” 

Gabriel pressed her close, seeking again the half-sleep of 
her presence. “It felt so good, just now, to wake up beside 
you, . . . What a long time since I had you with me, Iskuhi, 
little sister. . . . I’m very happy now that you’re here. . . . 
Happy now, Iskuhi.” 

Her face sank slowly against his; she seemed too weak to 
carry her head on her shoulders. “You never came. ... So 
I’ve come. . . . It’s got as far as that, h.isn’t it?” 

His was the drowsy voice of a sleeper: “Yes, I think it’s got 
as far as that. , . .” 

In Iskuhi ’s words there was an exhausted, yet defiant in- 
sistence on her rights: “Well, you know what we promised 
. . . what you promised me .. . Gabriel . . . ?” 

He returned from distances. “There may still be a long day 
in front of us.” 


763 



She echoed his words in a deep breadi, m a k i ng a c£ 
them: “Still a long day . . ” She clasped his arm with ever-- 
increasing warmth. 

“There’s something I want you to do for me, IskuhL . . . 
We’ve often talked about it . . . Juliette’s far poorer and 
more unhappy than we are. . . .’’ 

Her cheek bent away from his face. But Gabriel took her 
lame hand, he kept stroking and kissing it “If you love me, 
Iskuhil . . . Juliette’s so inhumanly lonely . . . inhumanly 
lonely ...” 

“Juliette hates me. She can’t bear the sight of me. I never 
want to sec her agam.” 

His hand could feel the tension shaking her body. “If you 
love me, Iskuhi, I ask you, please, to stay with Juliette. . . . 
You must leave the tents at sunrise. ... I shall feel easier. 
. . . She’s nearly mad, and you’re well. . . , We shall sec each 
other again . . . Iskuhi. . . .” 

Her head sank forwards. She was crying without any sound. 

He whispered: “I love you, Iskuhi. We’ll be together.” 

After a long while she tried to get up. “I’m going now.” 

He held her fast. “Not yet, Iskuhi. Stop with me a little 
while now. I need you. . . .’’ 

Long silence. His tongue felt too heavy to move. The sharp, 
thuddmg headache increased. Gabriel’s hght, wmged skidl 
changed into a gigantic lead bullet. He sank back into himself 
as though another rifle-butt had felled him. Sarkis Kilikian’s 
eyes stared at him with apathetic gravity. He shuddered. 
Where was the Russian lying? Had he given an order to move 
the body? The events of these last hours seemed completely 
alien; they had nothing to do with him: they were like some 
mad rumour. He relapsed into vague and heavy broodmgs, in 
which he himself was the centre-point of a headache which 
surged about him in waves. 'Then, when Gabriel started up 
in terror, Iskuhi was already on her feet. 

He felt in horror for his watch. “What time is it? . . . 

764 



ftnu Christl ... No, titne . . . timel Why have you given 
me the rug? . . . Why, you’re shaking with cold. . . . You’re 
rig^t; better go now, Iskuhi. ... Go to Juhctte. You’ve still 
got five, SIX hours in front of you. ... I’ll send Avakian 
when it’s time. . . . Good mght, Iskuhi. . . . Please take the 
rug. ... I don’t need it. . . .” 

He held her in his arms again. But it felt as though she were 
struggling to get loose, and had grown more disembodied and 
shadowy. So he promised again: “This isn’t good-bye. We’ll 
be together . . .’’ 

Some time after Iskuhi had left him, as he was about to 
stretch himself out again, the sudden memory of her made 
his heart sick. She had scarcely been able to move for weak- 
ness. Her legs and arms had been stiff with cold. Her fragile 
body had scarcely seemed to be there at all. Was not she her- 
self ill and dechning? And yet he had sent her away to look 
after Juliette. Gabriel blamed himself. He had not even gone 
a stretch of the dark and difficult way with Iskuhi. He hur- 
ried half up the slope and called: “Iskuhil Where are you? 
Wait for me!” 

No answer. She was too far away to hear him. 

Towards two that morning the fire had sunk down in the 
enclosure. At about that time Gabriel waked Avakian. The 
student had thrown himself down beside the howitzers and 
was so heavily asleep that Gabriel had to spend some time 
shaking him. The character of a man may be tested by the 
way in which he behaves when you wake him suddenly. 
Avakian, after a few movements of protest, raised his head in 
drowsy confusion. But as soon as he felt that this was Gabriel, 
he sprang to his feet and smiled a startled smile into the 
dark. 

Gabriel handed him a flask, in which there were still some 
dregs of cognac. “Here, drink, Avakian. . . . Buck up! I need 
you now. We shan’t have any more time to talk.” 

765 



They sat with their backs to the Town Enclosure wher^ 
indistinctly, they cotild watch the pickets of the new line. 
Some of these were now carrying hooded lanterns. This maze 
of lights wound slowly back and forth. The wind was as quiet 
as ever. 

“I haven’t slept— not a second,” admitted Gabriel. ‘Tve 
had too much to think about, m spite of this lump, which lets 
me know it’s there, right enough.” 

“Pity. You ought to have slept, Efiendi.” 

“Why? Tomorrow’s the day we’ve managed to put off so 
long. Yes, I wanted to say to you, Avakian, that really we've 
largely got you to thank for the fact that things have gone on 
as long as they have. We’ve worked splendidly together. 
You’re the most dependable person I know. Forgive my 
stupid way of putting it. Of course you’re more than just 
that.” 

This embarrassed Avakian. But Gabriel set a hand on his 
knee. “After all, some time we had to speak frankly. . . . And 
what other time is there?” 

“Those swine have destroyed everything,” raged the student, 
mainly because he was feeling embarrassed, but Bagradian 
waved away the past. 

“No need to worry about that now. It had to come some 
day. And usually, in this world, what you expect comes in 
the way you’d least expect it. But it wasn’t that I wanted to 
talk to you about. Listen’ You know, Avakian, before all this. 
I’d always the feeling that you were going to come through. 
Why, I myself couldn’t tell you. Probably it’s sheer moon- 
shine, but somehow I have a vision of you, back in Paris, 
the devil only knows how you managed to get there, or rather 
how you’re going to manage it.” 

The tutor’s pale and sloping forehead could be seen shim- 
mering in the dark. “That’s pure nonsense, forgive me, Gabriel 
Bagradian. What happens to you is bound to happen to me; 
there can be nothing else.” 


766 



"Why not? I agree that, if you go by reason, there can’t be 
anything else. But let’s be unreasonable for once, let’s say that, 
somehow, you get away.” 

Gabriel stopped and stared intently into the dark, as though 
Avakian’s happy future was already fairly easily distingui^- 
able. He took out his pocketbook and put it down on the grass 
beside him. “I didn’t want to keep you here, I wanted to send 
you back to the north trenches. I feel easier when you’re with 
Nurhan. But all that really doesn’t matter much. I’ve some* 
thing more important I want you to do for me, Avakian! Stay 
with the women. I mean with my wife, and Mademoiselle 
Tomasian. It’s part of the good presentiment I have about you. 
Perhaps you bring luck. Do what you can! But above all, see to 
it, please, that the tent gets cleared in time before the sun’s up. 
And see that Madame is carried down as carefully as possible 
on to the shore. Find somebody else, not Kevork. I hate the 
thought of his hands. Take Kristaphor and Missak.” 

Samuel Avakian protested. Tomorrow, in the last battle, he 
would be more necessary than ever. They had still the most 
important questions to settle. And so the conscientious ad- 
jutant began giving lists of the duties awaiting him. 

But his commandant impatiently refused to consider them. 
"No! No! We’ve made all the preparations we can. You leave 
all that to me. I don’t need you here any longer. This ends 
your war service, Avakian. The other is a personal request.” 

He handed over a sealed letter. “Here, friend, this is my will. 
You’re to keep it till Madame is well again, understand? I’m 
still, of course, going by my ridiculous feeling that you’ll come 
through. You see? And then, here’s a cheque on the Credit 
Lyonnais. I’ve no idea how much salary I still owe you. . . . 
And, of course, you’re perfectly right to consider me mad. 
Placed as we are, such calculations arc too ridiculous. I’m being 
pedantic. It may be all the sheerest superstition. Let’s say 
I’m making magic. See? Just a little magic.” 

Bagradian sprang up with a laugh. The impresuon he ga'-'C 

767 



wtt young and dependable. ‘If I stirvive you, that JiiiQifiet 
both the will and the cheque— so look out!” 

But his laugh sounded strained. Avakian kept the paper$ 
at arm’s length and began to protest again. And now Gabriel 
got impatient “Go now, please. I shall feel easier.” 

The last hours before sunrise dragged unbearably. Gabriel 
set his teeth as he stared through the brightening dark. In the 
first twilight he trained his guns on to the South Bastion. The 
dense early morning mists of this windless day took long to 
clear. A red, angry sun burst mto the sky. Gabriel knelt as 
prescribed on the right of the first howitzer, and tugged with 
fervour at the fuse-tape. The cracking din, the wild kick of 
the gun-carnage, fire and smoke, the howling in the air, the 
crystal-hard seconds before the distant impact of the shell, 
were like a deliverance. All the unbearable tension in Gabriel’s 
mind released itself in this piece of gunnery. What reason 
had the prudent commander of the Damlayik for wasting irre- 
placeable shells before the sUghtest sign of a Turkish attack? 
Was he trying to wake, or scare, the enemy? Encourage his 
own? Did he hope his shell would so devastate Turkish com- 
pames as to rob them of all their courage to advance? None of 
all this! Gabriel had fired this first shot, not for any tactical 
reason, but simply because to wait any longer was too un- 
bearable. It was a sheer cry, half for help, half of tragic jubila- 
tion, that the night was past. And not only he — all the ex- 
hausted men of the hnc of nfles, bent double with cold, felt 
just as he did. The outposts chmbed the nearest hillock for a 
wider view. But as far as they could overlook the uneven 
ground of this mountain plateau, the Damlayik lay deserted. 
The Turks did not seem to have left their base yet, nor in the 
north. But the answer came. It took a little time commg, and 
in this breathing-space Bagradian had leisure to fire two more 
shots. Then the deep, the monstrous crack of a thunderbolt. 
No one knew what it was. High over him a hiss of iron, 
which seemed to fill the entire mountain, from Amanus to 

768 



H' Akra. The impact crashed down iar in the distance. Some* 
where in the Orontes plain. This thunderbolt had risen off the 
sea. 

That same night the communes had set up their unsheltered 
camp, pell-mell, among rocks, on the crags, without any 
definite plan. Ter Haigasun had given the mukhtars orders to 
bring Oskanian to him, dead or alive. The priest’s whole soul 
was engrossed with the one fiery longing to avenge the out- 
raged majesty of the law, this base betrayal of the commumty,- 
on the guilty parties. 

But Teacher Hrand Oskanian was in hiding, not far from 
the Dish Terrace. He was not alone. The neophytes of his cult 
of suicide had joined him. On Musa Dagh there had not so 
far been one case of suicide. Even tonight Oskanian only had 
four miserable converts. A man and three women. The man 
was fifty, but looked like an old man. He was one of the silk- 
weavers round Kheder Beg. Oskanian’s teaching had found in 
Margoss Arzruni a willing disciple. Of the women the eldest 
was a matron whose whole family had died. The two others 
were still quite young. The child of one of them had perished 
in her arms on the day before. The other, unmarried, came of 
a well-to-do Yoghonoluk family and was known everywhere 
as a lugubrious, rather scatter-brained person. 

Oskanian, while the putsch was still in progress, had escaped 
and in terror sought this refuge. But Margoss Arzruni, the 
prophet’s apostle, had tracked him down, and now brought the 
teacher these three faithful women, all ready to make his 
words a reality. It is easier to kill oneself in company. And 
the silk-weaver was one of those implacable apostles who will 
not permit the prophet to go back one iota on his evangel. 
For many days, that these sayings might come to fruition in 
his mind, he had visited the Master in the South Bastion. The 
five sat close to one another, sheltered by one of the great 
boulders which block up the way to the Dish Terrace. They 

769 



were freezing, and so huddled together. The apostle of suicide 
was himself vaguely surprised that he, almost at the point of 
carrying out the most solemn resolution of which a human 
being is capable, should still be feeling a certain glow of 
pleasure at the nesding proximity of a female. It did not 
trouble him, however, as he let himself be catechized by the 
matron, who, full of trust, questioned her teacher (since no 
doubt he had examined this side of the question) as to 
possible results in the Beyond for those who begin eternity for 
themselves. 

“It’s a great sin. Teacher, I’m sure. I only oo it so as to see 
my folk again, quickly again' But perhaps I shan’t be allowed 
to see them again. I may have to stay in hell for all eternity, 
because, you see, 1 know it’s a great sin.” 

Oskanian raised his pointed nose, which glimmered through 
the dark. “You’ll be giving back to nature what nature has 
given you.” 

This portentous saying seemed to afford Arzruni, tlie silk- 
weaver, a diabolical satisfaction. He rubbed his hands to- 
gether, crowing in a weakly strident voice: “Well, old woman, 
hear what he says! Does that satisfy you? Of course, if it’s 
only your folk you’re wanting to see again, you can always 
wait for that till tomorrow. The Turks aren’t likely to over- 
look you, you know. No one’ll want you for his harem. 
But I’m not going to wait. I’ve had enough of it!” 

She bent forward, crossing her hands over her breasts. 
“Jesus Christ will forgive me. . . . God knows all. . . .” 

This gave the teacher his chance of a pungent saying. 

“God knows all'” he screeched. “The one reason for for- 
giving Him for having made this world the way He has 
would be that He knows nothing — nothtngl — ^about it. . . . 
He bothers His head with us about the same as though we 
were hce. See? He might have His hands full otherwise. . . .” 

The apostle Arzruni echoed in an ecstasy of derision: “Ye^ 
He might have His hands full otherwise. . . . Like lice . . 

770 



But the prophet, whose acumen had almost exhausted him, 
turned to this matron who hesitated to sin. “Why should He 
bother about you, since He’s only a fool notion in your head?” 

The silk-weaver bhnked, getting the sense of it; this dawned 
on him, and he roared with satisfaction, slapping his thighs 
and swaying about hke a praying Moslem. “Fool notion in 
your head— old woman— understand that ? Only in your head. 
. . . Well, spit him out of it, spit him out!” 

These blasphemies and Arzriini’s laugh evoked wild sobs in 
the young mother. She remembered how, after a long struggle, 
someone had taken the small, stiff body out of her arms. 
This man, one of the hospital staff, had run off to fling her 
three-year-old son away with the others, somewhere. She had 
spent hours looking for his corpse. She only hoped they’d 
thrown him in the sea. This mother longed to be m the sea, 
with her baby. She sprang up with a piercing scream: “Oh, 
why do you sit here talking like this for hours? Do come 
along!” 

But the Master reproved: “It’s got to be done in the proper 
order.” 

It was well past midnight when they set about determining 
precedence. Arzruni proposed they should draw lots. But 
Oskaman was of the opinion that the women should be the 
first to go; It was more seemly. Thirst the eldest, he said, then 
the younger, and last the youngest. He gave no further reasons 
for this arrangement, but, since the women raised no objec- 
tions, they left it at that Finally he declared himself willing 
to draw lots with his apostle. Fate went against or, if one pre- 
fers It, for him, since it gave him piecedence of the silk- 
weaver. It was quiet, without a breath of wind. But a flurried 
sea still growled on the rocks far below The darkness was 
thick enough to bite The teacher crept, fumbling his way very 
gingerly indeed, to the rocks’ edge, with the help of a lantern 
which he set down there. Its light, most curiously steady, 
marked the boundary hne between Here and There. Then, 

771 



HI OMUter of ceremonies of the Gulf, escort firom Iiere iflHs 
eteraky, he waved an inviting hand in its direction. 

The matron knelt for a few minutes, crosang hersdf agata 
and again. She came on, in httl^ tripping steps, and vanidbed 
without a cry. The young mother followed her at once. She 
went with a run. A short, sharp scream. . . . The lugubrious 
girl was far less eager. She begged the teacher to give her a 
shove over the brink. But Oskanian refused her this good 
office protesting loudly. The lugubrious girl went down on 
her hands and knees, and so on all fours dragged on to the 
edge. There she seemed to think it over. Her hand went out 
for the lantern, which it upset. The lantern rolled to destruc- 
tion. But, instead of keeping still, or crawling back, the gui 
stretched her hands out ^ter it, bent forwards, and so lost her 
balance. A terrible, endless scream, since the wretched girl 
clung on, another full two minutes, to some jutting ledge, be- 
fore she plunged down. . . . Oskanian and Arzruni stood in 
the dusk, without a word. A long, long pause. That scream 
still cut Its way through the heavy consciousness of the 
teacher. 

At last the aposde reminded his prophet: “Well, Teacher, 
now it’s your turn.” 

Hrand Oskanian seemed to consider the whole position in 
all Its bearings. He remarked in a not too self-conscious voice: 
‘The lantern’s gone. I’m not going to do it in the dark. Let’s 
wait for the twilight. It can’t be so long now. . . .’’ 

The silk-weaver observed with some show of reason: “Far 
easier in the dark. Teacher.” 

“For you, perhaps; not for me though." The Master sounded 
very reproachful indeed. “I need hght.” 

With this lofty and inspiring remark Margoss Arzruni 
seemed fairly satisfied. But be kept close to Oskanian. If 
his teacher, who had sat beside him, made the smallest move- 
ment, the disciple would at once catch him by the lapd 
(Oskanian still had on the tattered wreck of that swallow- 



tttl tfiitord’s HMMming'Coat, ordered and selected to outrival 
Oonzague with Juliette). The grip iwith which Arzruni de- 
tained his prophet was loyal, nervous, and mistrustful. Hrand 
Oskanian had become the prisoner of his teachings. Once he 
jumped up. The silk-weaver sprang up by his side. There was 
no gttting away from this disaplc. 

When, ages later, the edge of the rock outlined itself in 
misty twilight, Arzruni rose and took off his overall: “Teacher, 
it’s not dark now I" 

Oskanian was a long time stretching, yawning, as a man 
yawns after deep, refreshing sleep. He stood up portentously. 
He blew his nose several times with trumpet blasts before, 
followed by his guardian apostle, he would take the first in- 
evitable steps. But he turn^ again, still some way from the 
sharp verge. “Better that you should go first. Weaver.” 

The shrivelled Arzrum, in dirty shirt-sleeves, craned his 
observant head in the teacher’s face. “Why me. Teacher? 
Didn’t we draw for it? You drew to go first, didn’t you? 
And the three women have gone on in front of us. . . .” 

Oskanian’s hirsute face looked very white. “Why you, you 
say? Because I mean to be the last! Because I don’t intend to 
have you run away and joke about me.” 

It looked at first as though the silk-weavcr were giving his 
whole mind to this. But when the Master least expected it he 
found his apostle at his throat. Yet he had sensed an attack. 
He soon knew that, small as he was, he was stronger than the 
rickety Arzruni. And yet that fanabcal weaver, whose deepest 
faith was suddenly shattered, threatened to be a dangerous 
customer. Oskaman felt himself thrust back, a good foot 
nearer the roaring deep. No doubt this madman was trying to 
pull them down to dcstrucuon together. The teacher suddenly 
fl ung himself on the ground, gripped a clump of a shrub with 
one hand, the weaver’s right leg with the other, and so upset 
him. Still gripping hard to the steel-tough shrub, he kicked 
out wildly at the body and face of his sprawling discipie. 

773 



Exactly How it happened he did ikx know, hut ahnoat thti 
next instant he foui^ himself kicking into the void. The body 
of Arzruni the silk-weaver toppled over the edge into the tog. 
Oskanian sat up stiffly. Still sitting up, he worked his way 
backwards along the ledge, back, back. He felt himself saved. 
But that only lasted a few minutes. Then he knew that even 
this victory was in vain. Never again could he return into the 
company of the just and the respectable. Nor could he fly. The 
litde teacher jumped to his feet and wandered, in htde, hesitant 
steps. During their struggle the weaver had torn a swallow- 
tail off his coat. Oskanian puffed out his pigeon-breast, as he 
always did at the laboured moments when he felt he must 
assert his puny self. But then his chest crumpled together, as 
he hopped in the fog like a bird with a drooping wing. He 
strove to comfort and move himself to tears by means of a 
poetic phrase, on which his whole mind was suddenly focused: 

“In sunlight, not in the grey dawn.” 

In the course of these hoppings Oskanian stumbled over a 
flag-pole. It was their banner with the cry for help inscribed 
on It: “Christians in Need,” which the wind had long since 
overturned and carried away. Both as a look-out station and 
burying'ground the Dish Terrace had for days been out of 
use. Hrand Oskanian picked up the heavy flag-pole and 
shouldered it without knowing what he did. Then, most 
grotesque of ensigns, he hopped about with it, in ever- 
increasing desperation. How he longed to forbid the sun to 
rise, over there, from behind the Amanus mountains! But 
here it already was, red and angry. One last, helplessly lived 
thought: “Off this cursed rocki Find somewhere to hidel Bet- 
ter starve slowly I” But for Oskanian there was no going back. 
He must make good his poetic word about the sunshine. The 
women and the weaver were expecting him. His banner held 
almost at arm’s length, he lingered on around the edge. Mists 
cleared below him. Wide beams, swaths, banks of it, unwound 
themselves in coiling arabesques, leaving, here and there, a 

774 



patch of sea as flat and dull as a dark-grey cloth. At one place 
on this cloth something was guttering. Hrand Oskanian shut 
his eyes. Now he must be really out of his mind, as he’d always 
feared he would be one day. He opened and shut his eyes again 
and again. The fog meanwhile dispersed and vanished. But not 
the glittering thing on the broad grey cloth; it might have 
been stuck to it. It no longer shimmered vaguely in and out, 
but was a long, blue-grey ship with four funnels, which, seen 
from abov^ looked rather small and not quite worth taking 
seriously. A few wisps of fog still hovered round it. 

The teacher had very sharp eyes. The javelins of a young, 
impetuous sun, eager to do battle, made it easy to read the 
big, black letters along the bow: Guichen. 

Oskanian let out a few yammering howls. Gtdchen. The 
miracle had been wrought. But not for him. They were all to 
be saved. Only not he. Suddenly he jerked his pendant ban- 
ner: “Christians in Need.” Faster and faster, like a lunatic, the 
teacher brandished the heavy pole, every minute, indefatigably. 
From the captain’s bridge of this armoured cruiser a French 
signalling flag soon gave him his answer. Oskanian never 
noticed that. He had ceased to know that he was himself. He 
waved and waved the big white sheet in wild half-circles. He 
groaned with the effort. But, for as long as his strength con- 
tinued, he still might live. Bagradian’s howitzers cracked far 
off, above. Shorter, each time more unevenly, the half<ircles 
of the Armenian flag still oscillated. Perhaps, Oskanian 
thought, I might manage to get on board and not be seen. 
And, as he thought it, stepped over the edge, drawn forward 
by the weight of his own flag-pole more than by any act of his 
own will, with a shriek of wild terror, into nothing. 

At that minute the twelve-inch guns of the Gmchen halted 
the Turks with a shell that crashed down into Suedia. 

The general, the Kaimakam, and the yus-bashi were struck 
to the very soul by this order to halt. A few minutes be&re 

775 



xecdmg It, tbey liad come together, as arranged, in the 
bashi’t headquarters. Even &e thick, dyspeptic, lethaxi^ 
Kaimakam, for whom early rising and climbing hills were a 
more than ordinary sacrifice, had come. His four company 
commanders stood round the yus-bashi, waiting to take his 
personal order to advance. Their scouts had done excellent 
work in the night. They could bring in precise information 
of this new refuge along the seashore. It was also known that 
two enfeebled, badly protected bnes barred the south entrance 
to the Damlayik. Therefore, by order of Ali Risa, only two 
companies with machine-guns need trouble to attack this 
rickety front. The attack was timed for the moment when, in 
the north, mountain artdlery had begun to shatter Armenian 
trenches. But the Kaimakam and yus-bashi were quite positive 
that, by about that time, resistance would have been effectually 
broken. This time they were done fori Bagradian’s first howit- 
zer shell had struck on the stone slope under the rocks, his 
second went even wider, his third came down rather close to 
this group of officers. Splinters and showers of stones whizzed 
round th^. Two infantrymen lay yelping. 

The yus-bashi carefully ht a agarette. “We’ve some losses, 
Generali” 

Ali Risa’s transparent, youthful face Hushed to the ears. His 
lips looked even thinner than usual. 

“Yus-Bashi, I order you to see to it that this Bagradian 
doesn’t get killed and is brought to me personally.” 

Scarcely had these words been uttered, when the first for- 
bidding thunderbolt was heard. The officers hurried up to 
their western redoubt, from which there was a good view out 
to sea. The grey-blue Gtuchen sat firmly, as if frozen into its 
leaden waves. A black stream of smoke rose from its funnels. 
Round the mouth of its gun the Hash-smoke had already dis- 
persed. Its commander seemed to have planted only one shdd 
in the Orontes plain for demonstration purposes. 

The first to find a voice was the Kaimakam. It shook with 

776 



“L^’s understaiKl each other, Generali You’re in 
cmninand o£ the m i l ita r y assistance. But the final decision rests 
with me.” 

Ali Risa, without answering this, eicamincd the Guichen 
through his field-glass. And on this occasion the Kaimakam, 
who usually seemed expectandy half-asleep at a moment of 
great decision, lost his temper. “I demand. General, that you 
start operations immediately. That ship over there can’t hold 
us back.” 

Ali Risa lowered his field-glass and turned to his adjutant. 
“Telephone down to Habaste. My order to be sent on full 
speed to every gun-emplacement m the north: ‘Artillery not 
to open fire.* ” 

“Artillery not to open fire,” the adjutant repeated, and 
rushed away. 

The Kaimakam straightened his loose, but mighty bulk. 
“What does this order mean? I demand an explanation, 
Effendil” 

The general did not seem to see him; his grey-blue eyes were 
turned on the yus-bashi. 

“Retire your advance companies. All troops tp vacate the 
mountain and concentrate in the valley of Yoghonoluk. Get a 
move on!” 

"I demand your explanation!” bellowed the Kaimakam; 
the pouches under his eyes had a deep blue look. “This is 
cowardice. I’m responsible to His Excellency. There’s no 
reason for holding up operations.” 

A long, cold glance from the young general passed into him. 
“No reason? Do you want to give the Allied fleet its pretext 
for shooting the whole coastline to bits? Their long-range 
shells will carry to Antakiya. Do you suppose that cruiser out 
there is going to stay by itself, Kaimakam? Would you like 
the French and English to land and set up a new war front 
in the heart of undefended Syria? What’s your opinion, 
Kaimakam?” 


777 



But the Kaifflakam, ydlowtsh-brown in the face, was splut* 
tering now through foamy hps: “All that has nothing to do 
with me! I, as the responsible person, order you 

He got no further. Since naturally the general’s counter- 
order had not, in the few minutes, reached Turkish gunnery 
their first shots had begun to crackle from a notch in the 
North Saddle. And now the long, shapely barrels in the tur- 
ret of the Guichen had begun to turn. There was scarcely 
time to draw three breaths before — crack after crack — ^the 
first shells fell among the domino houses of Suedia, El Eskel, 
Yedidje. At once the tall chimney of the alcohol factory ran 
up an American flag. Wooden Turkish houses already flamed. 

Ali Risa yelled at the yus-hashi: “Telephone cease fire, 
damn you! The saptiehs to evacuate all civilians. Everyone into 
the valley of the villages!” 

The freckled mudir from Salomka, who so far had stood m 
respectful silence, was seized with frenzy in his turn. His 
hands flew up to hiS mouth; he bellowed as though, through 
all the noise of her guns, he were determined to be heard on 
board the Guichen: “This is a flagrant infringement of inter- 
national law. . . . Open coastlme. . . . Interference with 
domestic policy. . . .” 

But Major-General AIi Risa picked his walking-stick up off 
the ground and turned to go. His officers crowded in round 
him. He stopped. “Why shout so, Mudir.? You’d better thank 
Ittihad.” 

“I don’t feel well,” moaned the Kaimakam, who, considering 
the state of his general health, had already exerted himself too 
much that day. His heavy body sank down. He seemed to do 
his utmost not to faint. The same words over and over again 
came spluttering through his blackened lips: “This is the end. 

. . . This IS the end. . . .” 

The mudir had to fetch four saptiehs to carry his sick 
superior down to the valley. 


778 



It might well have been supposed that Gabriel, too, would 
sink to earth, the moment his consciousness of this miracle had 
fully permeated his spirit, under the sheer weight of such re- 
lief. But nothing of the kmdl Gabriel was too numbed to feel. 
The most prudently and carefully chosen words could scarcely 
render with truth what he felt at that moment. No, not 
disillusionment. That would be too rough a way of putting it. 
Rather the need for unwelcome effort, which an organism 
fagged to death has got to make to readjust itself. Thus the 
human eye defends itself, coming out of the dark into bright 
light, against this all too starthng change, even though the 
soul may have longed for it. 

Bagradian’s first reaction was the order, which he sent along 
the hncs of his defence: “No one to move I Everyone to stop 
where he is!” 

This was a highly important order. Since Gabriel did not 
know what the Turks intended, and then he, himself, with his 
own eyes, had not yet seen the flag this warship flew. Also it 
seemed highly improbable that this ship could or would pick 
up four and a hdf thousand people. No less surprising was 
the effect of this miracle on the defenders, who, after this 
eternity spent in the expectation of death, lay paralysed in 
their long, extended order. A boy, breathlessly waving, had 
brought the news. It did not release one cry; tense silence fol- 
lowed it. But suddenly the hncs broke. Those who had heard 
of this miracle crowded up the hillock to the howitzer em- 
placement, to their commander. Not this was remarkable, but 
the change in the deep, gruff voices of these men. Suddenly 
they piped and whined. High falsetto tones surrounded 
Gabriel. It sounded almost like a tremulous kind of women’s 
chiding, or the outburst of terrified lunatics. Their voices, be- 
fore their souls well knew they were saved, ran up into their 
heads. They obeyed his order at once. They lay down again 
in extended hnes, each with his rifle, as though nothing 
stupendous had come to pass. Only Teacher Hapeth Shatakii* 



ian impbred the chief to send him out as envoy to die 
since he, whose French was so perfect, so flawless his accear» 
was obviously the man to negotiate. The teacher smiled aO 
over his face. Gabriel, who, by his own example, wanted to 
keep the decads together till the last danger of a Turkish 
attack should have passed, let Shatakhian go, with these in* 
structions: Whatever happened, communication must be main- 
tained between the encamped people down on the shore and 
their armed defenders on the mountain. Ter Haigasun and 
3edros Altouni were to board the French ship with Shatakh* 
lan. Moreover: the captain of the Guichen must mstantly be 
informed of the fact that a French lady, dangerously ill, was 
in their camp. 

The artillery fire which opened against the North Saddle 
confirmed Bagradian’s worst suspicions. The Turk had no 
thought of dropping his prey without further question. But^ 
as soon as this artillery fire died down again, the big guns on 
board the Guichen dropped neatly crashing shells on to Otto- 
man villages. The whole Orontes plain might well have been 
roused for the Last Judgment. Even when Gabriel climbed 
his observation post, Suedia, El Eskel, Ycdidje, and indeed 
even the distant Am Yerab gave out smoke and flames. On 
horses, mules, in ox-carts, in streaming shoals, the people were 
rushing on for safety into the valley of Yoghonoluk. After a 
time Gabriel went back beside the howitzers. Already the 
shells, set to fuse, were standing there behind the carriages. 
He had intended to swivel his guns round to the north, and, 
when things had got so far, drop shells into the Turkish 
advance. He gave up this mtenuon, though he by no mrann 
considered the danger past. Gabriel sat on the ground by the 
howitzers. He stared out, and at the same time, inwards. 

“Now perhaps 111 be back in a few weeks in Paris. We 
shall hve in the old flat in the Avenue Klcber, and start life 
again.” But this thought— which an hour ago had been the 
fantasy of a lunatic— did nothing to fill up his agfnni«Kmg 

780 



<;il^pdiMSS. Not a trace of kneding jubilation, that rush of 
Wannest gratitude to God, warranted by the unthinkab le 
miracle. Gabriel had no desire for Paris, for a flat, for culti- 
vated people, for comfort; no, and not even for a bellyful, a 
bed and deanliness. Whatever trace of emouon he managed 
to find in himself could be described as the nagging desire to 
be alone; it grew in him from minute to minute. But it would 
have to be such solitude as there is not. An unpeopled world. 
A planet without animal needs, or movement. A cosmic her- 
mitage, and he the only person in it, gazing out at peace, with- 
out any past, present, and future. 

The new camping-grounds of the village communes were set 
fairly far apart. Yoghonoluk and Habibli were fairly high up, 
whereas Bitias, Azir, and Kebussiye had picked out places 
along the beach, where receding rocks left free a few uneven 
clearings, grown about with hard, dry shrub. 

They had all still been asleep when Teacher Oskanian waved 
his flag. It was no longer a sleep of human beings, but of 
dead matter, as rocks or mounds sleep. The crack of doom 
from the ship’s guns broke it. Almost four thousand women, 
children, greybeards, opened startled eyes to the light of this 
fourth day of panic. Those down on the beach saw an in- 
credible mirage, born of cnfeeblemcnt; it rose quiet on the 
solid sea. Some stumbled to their feet, to shake off the phan- 
tom. Others lay on the hard rock, indifferent to it, chafed to 
the bone as they were, since their bones had no flesh on them. 
They did not so much as turn on the other side. But then, 
among these grown-ups, suddenly, there arose a short-breathed, 
wheezing whimper, like the weak protest of very sick children. 
It spread from one to the other of them. And now the 
feeblest wraiths hovered upright. Boys, who had still more 
strength in them than anyone, began to clamber up the 
nicks. 

The big cruiser, the Gmchen, had anchored about half a sca- 

781 



mile off the coast. A devastating sight awaited its cheers aod 
ratings. They saw hundreds of bare skeleton arms held out to 
them, begging colleaively. The human forms of which those 
arms were a part, and indeed the faces, looked blurred even 
through a field-glass, like so many ghosts. Added to which a 
sharp entanglement of thin voices, as of chirruping insects, 
which had the effect of coming from much further off than 
It actually did Then, down between the rocks, more and 
more of these human grasshoppiers came hurrying to increase 
the number of begging arms. Before the commander of the 
Gtachen could decide what to do for these persecuted, two 
diminutive shapes had dived from a rock, boys it seemed, and 
begun to struggle towards the ship. They got to within about 
a hundred yards of her, and then their strength seemed to fail. 
But a boat had been providentially sent out to them, which 
took them up. Another boat moved off shorewards. It was to 
bring back the envoys of these curious “Christians in Need." 
But It was soon apparent that, when God sends us a miracle, 
reality has always enough malice in it to make it seem, by a 
hundred artful tricks, less miraculous. This coast was so diffi- 
cult to land on, the surf so heavy, that even the well-manned 
boat of the Gutchen could scarcely manage to put ashore, and 
Aram’s failure to make his fishery answer was justified. Almost 
an hour of unsuccessful efforts to land had passed before Ter 
Haigasun, Altouni, and Hapeth Shatakhian could come on 
board. This was the hour during which the Gutchen, provoked 
thereto by the challenging gunfire on Musa Dagh, sent heavy 
shells crashing all over the Moslem plain. 

When Captain Brisson received the delegation in the officers' 
mess, his guns had already ceased their fire. Brisson gave a 
little start of horror at the sight of these men — ^these three 
shrivelled bodies hung with rags, these wildly 'uearded faces 
with high foreheads and huge eyes. And Ter Haigasun looked 
the wildest. Half his beard had been singed away. The burn 
glowed on his right cheek. Since his everyday cassock had 

782 



been burned in the presbytery-hut, he still wore the borrowed 
rug draped round his shoulders. 

The captain held out his hand. “The priest? The teacher?” 
he asked. 

But Shatakhian gave him no time for further inquiries; he 
gathered together his whole strength, bowed, and launched 
out on the long speech, rehearsed aloud on the path to the 
beach and, later even, in the boat. He began it somewhat in- 
appropriately: "Mow general . . 

When from these long-winded, eastern outpourings, Captain 
Brisson had managed to disentangle essentials from much that 
was beside the point, the orator, delighted with his own 
prowess, stood hoping that so august a hearer might deign a 
word of praise for his faultless accent and choice vocabulary. 
Captain Brisson only glanced from one to another of them and 
asked what was Madame Bagradian’s maiden name. Hapeth 
Shatakhian was delighted to furnish even this, and to pro- 
claim his familiarity with the names of the best French fam- 
ihes. And then Ter Haigasun spoke. To the teacher’s amaze- 
ment, indeed disgust, he spoke fluent French, though he had 
never even troubled to say so, m all these years as school super- 
intendent. He told at once of the hunger and enfeeblement of 
his people, begging for help without delay, since otherwise 
many women and children might scarcely get through the next 
few hours. As he was saying this. Dr. Bedros Altouni col- 
lapsed and almost fell off the chair he sat in. Brisson sent at 
once for cafe and cognac, and a plentiful meal for the three 
delegates. Yet neither the old doctor nor the others could man- 
age to swallow more than a few mouthfuls. Meanwhile the 
ship’s commander had summoned the quartermaster and given 
orders to send out boats immediately with whatever supplies 
might be available. The ship’s doctor, hospital staff, and an 
armed detachment of marines were also ordered ashore. 

Brisson then explained to the Armenians that the Guichen 
was not an independent unit, but the leader of a mixed Englisu 

783 



French squadron, under orders to sail nonh-west abng ^ 
Anatolian coast. Yesterday evening, three hours before the 
main body of the fleet, she had put out from the Cyprus bay 
of Famagusta. The fleet commander, the rear-admiral, was 
on board the Jeanne d’Arc, the flag-ship and vessel of the 
line. They would have to await his deasion. But an hour ago 
a wireless message had been sent out to the Jeanne d'Arc. The 
envoys need not be afraid; tho'e was no danger that a French 
admiral would leave so valiant a commune of the persecuted 
Armenian Chrisuan people to its fate without more ado. Ter 
Haigasun bent his head, with the singed beard. 

“May I permit myself a question, Monsieur le Capitaine? 
You tdl me that your ship is not independent, but under 
orders. How did it happen then that you came this way along 
the coast instead of sailing north-west?” 

“Gendemcn, I’m sure it must be a long time since you 
smoked. May I offer you a packet of cigarettes?” 

And Brisson handed the teacher a big packet. He turned 
his grey, naval head to Ter Haigasun, thoughtfully. 

“Your question interests me, man pere, because in fact 1 
went against my orders, and came a good way out of our 
course. Why? At about ten we passed the north cape of 
Cyprus. An hour after midnight I received reports of a big 
fire on the Syrian coast. It looked as though a fairly large 
town had been set on fire. A wide expanse of red sky. We 
were well out to sea, at least thirty miles off land. And now 
I hear that you’d only set fire to a few huts. Of course fog 
often acts as a magnifying-lens. Such things arc conceivable. 
Half the sky was red! So, from curiosity — it must have been 
mere curiosity — I altered our course.” 

Ter Haigasun rose from his chair. It looked as though he 
had something very important to say to them. His lips moved. 
But suddenly, in a few uncertain steps, he went to the wall of 
the cabin and pressed his face against the glass pane of a 
porthole. Captain Brisson supposed that the priest, like the old 

784 



doctor, was on the verge of a collapse. The priestly face shun' 
xpered in rays of sunlight, as though cut in amber. 

Ter Haigasim’s eyes were sightless with ecstasy as he stam- 
mered in Armenian: “The evil only happened ... to enable 
God to show us His goodness.” 

He raised his hands lightly, as though all this suffering had 
Been surmounted by its meanmg. The Frenchman could not 
tmderstand. Bedros Hckim sat asleep, with his head on the 
table. But Hapeth Shatakhian was not thinking of the fire 
in the Town ^closure, which began with a sacrilegious altar 
flame to end in redempuon. 

Two hours later the great Jeanne d’Arc was on the horizon, 
with behind her the English and the French cruisers. The big 
troop-ship did not arrive ull close on midday. In a wide, 
beautifully even line, these blue-grey turreted fighters ap- 
proached the land, drawing long foam-trails in their wake. 
The squadron commander had signalled back to Captain 
Bnsson that not only would he pick up these Armenian fugi- 
tives, and change his course in order to do so, but was him- 
self most anxious to inspect this heroic encampment, where 
the offshoots of a Christian people had held their own for forty 
days against superior forces of barbarians. The rear-admiral 
was a pious, indeed a celebrated Catholic, and this fight of 
Armenians in defence of the religion of the Cross had really 
moved him. 

When the squadron had anchored in perfect symmetry, 
there began a sparkling stir on the glassy sea. Bugle-signals 
vied with one another. Chains and pulleys creaked. Slowly the 
big boats hovered down. Meanwhile the sailors of the Gutchen 
had improvised a kind of landing-jctty at the most accessible 
place along the shore, where Pastor Aram’s raft came m un- 
expectedly useful. The rescued people lay, sat, squatted on nar- 
row ledges and watched this sight through half-seeing eyes, as 
though It were no concern of theirs. The head-surgeon of 

785 



the Guichen, with his assistants and medical staff, were busy 
with the sick and those exhausted with hunger. He praised 
Bedros Altouni highly, for the fact that yesterday, even when 
hfe seemed almost at an end, he had still arranged a separate 
camp for infected people and those suspected of being so. 

Altouni admitted with a sigh that many of these poor people 
up on the Damlayik had died for want of proper care, though 
they might quite well have been saved with the usual nurs- 
ing. The head-surgeon frowned. It was a great responsibility 
for him to take in these fever patients. But what was to be 
done? Christians could not simply be left to the mercies of the 
revengeful Turks. Since the head-surgeon was humane, he 
gave his Armenian colleague a hint: “Don’t say too much 
about It.” The troop-ship was almost empty, with big, well- 
arranged hospital cabins. The head-surgeon winked at the old 
doctor not to give it another thought. 

Vast supplies of bread and tinned food had been divided up 
among the healthy, in so far as there were any “healthy” to 
eat. The ships’ cooks had boiled big kettles of potato-soup, 
and the good-natured French sailors lent their own mess-tins. 
But the people received all this as though it were none of it 
real — dream-bread and dream-soup, which could never satisfy. 
Yet a new state of mind possessed the communes when every- 
one had gulped down his jxirtion, unchewed, almost un- 
tasted. People felt almost lifeless, weary to death, and yet, 
havmg eaten, the forty days seemed as remote as some half- 
forgotten saga. Their bodies might protest against this un- 
accustomed food (oh, bread, bread, a thousand times desired)* 
— to their souls all this seemed merely normal, as if nothing 
else had ever been, as if God’s grace were no more than 
“normality.” 

The rear-admiral landed, with his numerous staff, by the 
rickety bridge. A swarm of craft shot in the wake of his 
motor-launch. Detachments of marines with machine-guns 
had been ordered ashore from every vessel, to protea the 

786 



squadron commander. These troops landed and invested the 
narrow ledges of rock in such dense throngs that, hemmed in 
innumerable French uniforms, the admiral scarcely man^ 
aged to get a sight of this camp he was so curious to inspect. 
Then, as he came on closely through crowds of villagers, he 
a$ked h>r an exact account of the origin and course of this 
defence. And here Shatakhian got his second chance, a still 
better one, to air his French and charm an august French ear 
with his perfect accent and choicely extensive vocabulary. The 
rear-admiral was a small, dapper old gentleman with a 
soldierly face, austerely ornate. His cheeks had the brown tan 
of the sea. A little, snow-white moustache. His light-blue eyes 
were unrelenting, yet then look seemed mollified by is- 
tances. This old gentleman’s dapper litde body was not clothed 
in regulation naval uniform, but he wore a comfortable drill 
suit, to which only the narrow strip of decorations on his 
chest gave martial distinction. He asked several questions 
about the fighting strength of the Turks, and then, with his 
thin bamboo cane, pointed up the walls of rock and once 
more informed his suite of his decision to inspect the plateau 
and encampment. One of them ventured to observe that this 
would entail a climb of hundreds of metres, which perhaps 
might- bp too much for the chief. Nor would they be able to 
get back on board in time for lunch. This audacious officer 
got no answer. The rear-admiral gave the sign to proceed. His 
adjutant had to send off secret instructions to the marines to 
hurry on up the winding path at the double and reach the 
Damlayik plateau before the admiral. Such an incursion into 
enemy territory was a highly risky proceeding. The mountain 
seemed surrounded by Turkish troops and Turkish guns. 
It might lead to inconvenient surprises. But the chief’s well- 
known obstinacy made any further objections hopelc'is. It 
was decided, therefore, to drop a few shells, in the course of 
this pieme, in villages along the coast, to warn the Turks to 
keep their distance. 


787 



The long-4uffering adjutant had also to arrange £(»: a 
dal snack, since the effort entailed by such a climb might wdl 
prove a strain on an elderly naval officer. It was one of 
admiral’s pet foibles to show the younger men sun-ounding 
him how sound he was of wind and hmb. He went blithely 
on, well ahead of the rest. Sgto was his alpine guide. She 
darted on and back, and on again, as her habit was, like a 
young mongrel bitch, covering the ground at least three times. 
Never in all her life had the orphan of Zeitun beheld such 
resplendent shapes. Her greedy, magpie eyes devoured these 
uniforms with their rows of medals, then gold braid, while 
her paw scraped out the last fat m a bully-beef tin. Her body 
glowed with the brandy the sailors had given her. She wrig- 
gled It urgently, in the indescribable rags of what had once 
been her “butterfly frock,” cajoling these dazzling gods. And 
she stretched out her dark brown paw to them while a sound 
indigenous to these regions came almost unbidden to her lips: 
“Bakshish.” 

The officers stopped several times, looked about, and began 
to admire the beauties of this treed and watered Musa Dagh. 
More than one was inspired to the same description as Gon- 
zague Maris: “Riviera.” Others again were charmed by its 
wildly virginal quality. The last to ascend were two young 
naval lieutenants. So far neither had said anything, nor had 
they even admired the view. The one, an Englishman, stood 
still, though he did not turn back to look at the sea, but stared 
straight at the wall of rock in front of him. 

“I say, you know, those Armenians! I don’t feel as though 
i’d been looking at people; nothing but eyes.” 

Gabriel had not broken his hues. Though he had had reports 
that the Turkish forces were being withdrawn, both north 
and south, he seemed still to put no faith in this peace. It may 
merely have been a maner of war-morale, still no armed de- 
fender should quit his post till his people’s fate has been fully 

788 



determined. But perliaps there were deeper reasons for his 
austerity. The new Gabriel had advanced too far along un- 
known paths to be able to find his way back to the old so 
quickly. The forty days had worked m him a transformation 
which held him banned by a kind of magic. Many a rougher 
man had the same experience. No one in his Ime protested or 
groused against Bagradian’s long resistance, least of all the 
consaence-stricken deserters, who could not do enough to dis- 
play their servility. Gabriel had spoken to the decads. No one 
must fancy they were safe till their last women and children 
were on board. Their steadiness must show the French the 
worth of the Armenian nation. They must leave this camp and 
their old home as undefeated soldiers, rifles in hand, in the 
steadiest order. Nor Would he consent to leave the howitzers 
shamefully undefended on the Damlayik, for the Turks to 
take back that night. He intended rather to present such mag- 
nificent trophies to the French nation. 

The fact that Ter Haigasun had had ample supplies sent up 
to the Damlayik, bread, marmalade, wine, and tinned meat, 
was no doubt as persuasive as Gabriel’s words. Also tobacco. 
The men lay about in a pleasant half-sleep, better pleased with 
their long rest than they would have been at having to move, 
no matter where. 

Their rest ended when the marines appeared on the plateau 
to march straight to the howitzer emplacement in one long, 
extended line. Then the Armenians sprang up and with shouts 
of joy rushed to meet the French. These sailors, in smart, clean 
uniforms, were in glaring contrast to the scarecrows, ragged 
and famished, of Musa Dagh. The men at last were fully 
conscious of this marvellous triumph of their enterprise. Then 
came the group of officers, and Gabriel went slowly to meet it. 
His approach was casual, he would have been ashamed to 
make it seem too soldierly. He had left his rifle on the ground. 
He looked now like a huntsman or a mining-engineer. He 
took offi his dented sun-helmet to confront the rear-admiral. 

789 



That old gentleman eyed him keenly for a second before 
holding out his hand. “You were the commander.^’’ 

Gabriel pointed at once to tlie howitzers. It seemed most 
important to show these rescuers that he did not come to them 
empty-handed: 

“Monsieur I’Amiral, I give over to you and the French 
nation these two guns which we captured from the Turks.” 

The rear-admiral, who possessed a highly developed cero- 
momousness, stood at the salute. All the other officers drew 
themselves up. “I thank you, Commander, in the name of the 
French nation, which receives these Armenian trophies of 
victory.” 

He held out his hand again to Bagradian. “Did you yourself 
capture these howitzers?” 

“No, my young son, who was kdled.” 

A long and general silence followed this. The rear-admiral 
pushed aside a stone with his bamboo cane. He turned to 
his escort “Will it be possible to get these guns down, and 
on hoard?” 

The expert of whom he asked it looked rather dubious. 
Given the necessary assistance, it would, with the greatest dif- 
ficulty, be possible, if they could have a whole day at their 
disposal. 

The admiral thought it over for a minute. He decided: 
“See to It these guns are rendered useless. Better blow them 
up, but carefully, please'” 

So much the better, Gabriel thought; two pieces of artillery 
less in the world. And yet he was sorry. For Stephan’s sakt. 

The admiral proffered consolation; “You have done the 
good cause most signal service. Monsieur le Co mman dant, 
even though these howitzers are destroyed.” 

This brought the transition from ceremony to practical 
matters. The rear-admiral asked for a complete account of 
Gabriel’s battles and defences. As Gabriel briefly described 
them, he grew conscious of the deepest impatience. These 

790 



kempt and soign^ officers in their smart uniforms seemed as 
faintly, patronizmgly interested in a reahty which constricted 
the heart as they might have been in any indifferent piece of 
amateur soldienng. The three batdcs? They had been by no 
means the reality. What did these electro-plated bigwigs know 
of the Armenian destiny, of the gradual, slow undermining 
of every individual life up there ^ His impatience became 
tinged with disgust. Couldn’t he simply turn his back on them 
and walk away ^ Now he was merely a civilian, and he should 
be looking after Juliette and Iskuhi, to make sure that they 
were properly bestowed. No — ^in Christ’s name! The French, 
after all, were miraculous saviours; they had a right to eternal 
gratitude. At last the pertmaaous rear-admiral expressed the 
wish to see their chief sector, the North Saddle. He had al- 
ready whispered to his officers to take careful notes of all they 
heard. He no doubt intended a precise report to the French 
Admiralty. This rescue of seven Armenian villages was, after 
all, not merely significant; it was highly decorative. So that 
therefore there was nothing left for Gabriel but to satisfy the 
admiral’s wish. He sent along word to Chaush Nurhan the 
Lion. At the same time, led by a few orderly-scouts, a detach- 
ment of marines with a machine-gun, to protect the admiral, 
went dhead. When half an hour later Gabriel and the officers 
chmbed the Saddle, Chaush Nurhan had already disposed his 
men in exemplary lines, to receive the French as soldiers 
should. 

Gabriel, not heeding the admual, went straight up to his 
weatherbeaten sergeant, whom he embraced. “Chaush Nur- 
han! It’s all over now! Thank you! And I thank every one of 
you!” 

The bearded men broke their neat rank and surrounded 
Gabriel. Many of them snatched his hand to kiss. This eager 
acclamation of their leader had in it, too, a dash of mistrust 
and dislike of these very resplendent guests. But the officers 
seemed profoundly affected by this scene, so much too manly 

791 



«D be soldierly. When the rear-adnural had briefly examioed 
&e trenches and rock barricades, he considered it his obvious 
duty to express esteem for Gabnel Bagradian and the officers 
with him, in a speech. This speech, ^though volubly Gallic, 
had m it the astringent seventy of the admiral’s profession and 
of his creed. “Monsieur Ic Oimmandant,” he began, “today 
in every country, and on all seas, deeds arc being done of the 
highest valour. But these are trained soldiers who confront 
each other. Here, pn Musa Dagh, it was otherwise. You had 
no trained men at your disposal, only simple, peaceable peas- 
ants and craftsmen. And yet, under your leadership, this hand- 
ful of insufficiently armed villagers not only held its own 
against an enemy many times as strong, but emerged vic- 
torious in the desperate struggle for bare hfe. This deed merits 
not to be forgotten. It was only possible with God’s help. God 
helped you because you fought for more than yourselves, for 
His holy Cross. You, therefore. Monsieur, have given proof 
of the most exalted of all heroisms— Christian heroism, which 
defends something more precious than hearth and home. The 
French nation thanks you out of my mouth, and is proud to 
be able to assist you. I shall be delighted to bring you all, to 
the last man, to a place of safety, and herewith inform you 
that my squadron will convey you to an Egypuan port, to 
Port Said, or Alexandria. . . .’’ 

As Gabriel bowed the deepest gratitude in answer to this 
sincerely felt little speech, cordially grasping the rear-admiral’s 
small, thin hand, he casually thought: “Port Said? Alexandria? 
I? What should I do there? Live in a concentration camp? 
Why? . . .” 

The clear, hard eyes of the litde admiral had in them an 
almost fatherly look of sympathy. “Monsieur Bagradian, I ask 
you to be my guest for the voyage, on the Jeanne d'Arc . . .” 

He awaited no thanks, but drew out a big, gold, bourgeois 
watch, from its chamois-leather case, and glanced uneasily at 

79a 



xt. “And now may I have the honour of being presented to 
Madame Bagradian? I used to know her father very well.” 

In the night Juliette had made fast the entrance to her tent 
with every available strap and bit of string. For her lifeless 
hands it had been an exhausting task, and she could scarcely 
drag herself back to bed again. It was not any fear of plunder- 
ing thieves which caused her to shut her tent so carefully. 
Strangely enough, the whole deserter episode, the grimacing 
mask of the long-haired thief, Sato’s hands stripping off her 
sheets, had passed Juliette by like any other dream. She made 
fast her tent to prevent its ever being light again, to keep an- 
other day from ever beginning, so that she might be left alone 
in bed, with her beloved, lacc-tnmmed little cushion, off which 
her head should never again be lifted She proposed a kind of 
wallmg-up for herself. And so, as familiar darkness enclosed 
the chrysalis of her being, she felt frostily at peace. Now she 
had never lived on Musa Dagh, never lost a son, never known 
that Turks were coming nearer and nearer to kill her. Magi- 
cally, the inside of her tent had become the innermost refuge 
of Juliette, beyond which there was no longer anything but 
the vague sounds of a dangerous world. Her reason had long 
since been unseated, her being sat inconceivably secure. 

Towards morning the little gong outside the curtain was 
loudly struck. Juliette never stirred. Nor did Avakian’s beg- 
ging, imploring voice, which she iccognized, move her to 
reply Then came the cracks of the howitzer-fire, and the ter- 
rifying shell from the Guichen. But for Juliette it was still 
dark night, and she crept even closer under her coverlets, so 
that nothing should worry her in the grave. Her fears for the 
darkness of her sepulchre were strongci than any instinctive 
panic. Her sick memory forgot each shell as it was fired. She 
crouched closer and closer into herself not to hear these voices. 
But they kept assailing her. And now even her tent walls 

793 



heaved, beixig wildly shaken from withouL Were the TuiIgi 
there? 

Kristaphor’s voice chimed in with Avakian’s: "Madame^ 
pleascl Open! Open at once, pleasel Madamei” 

The tent heaved more and more violendy; Juliette raised 
her head once. And now she aim recognized Mairik Antaram. 

“Answer, my darling, please for Christ’s sake! A wonder' 
ful piece of good luck!” 

Juliette turned over on her side. She knew what these Arme* 
nians called “good luck.” Let Gabriel come, too, it makes no 
difference, I shall stay where I am, I won’t be drawn out. 
Who, after all, is this Gabriel Bagradian? Is my name also 
Bagradian by any chance? Juliette Bagradian? At last some- 
body outside sht up the laces, impetuously broke open this in- 
secure vault. Bur she turned her back on the intruders, to 
show that, whenever she chose, she could be alone, in her own 
world. Avakian, Antaram, Altouni, were yelhng, in strange, 
little high-pitched voices, something about a French warsUp 
called the Guichen. Juliette pretended to be unconscious, but 
pricked up her ears, and decided, with the incredulous mis- 
trust of all neurotics: a trap! Had not Dr. Altouni only last 
night tried to force her to leave her beloved tent, her own, her 
very own— to go off and live with all the others, those filthy 
animals, who made her feel sick and hated her. No doubt this 
clumsy trick was concocted by Gabriel and Iskuhi, this story 
of a French ship was to lure her out, put her at their mercy, 
with nowhere to hide. But Juliette was not to be got so easily. 
Her enemies should not manage to dislodge her from this 
motherly and beneficent encasement in which she need not 
know any reality. Juhette let Avakian, Antaram, and Krista- 
phor beg and whine, and lapsed into unconsciousness. 

When at last all attempts proved useless, the old woman 
shrugged. “Let her be! There’s plenty of time.” 

But Avakian and Kristaphor dragged the mishandled trunks 
outside the tent and loyally began to pack and tidy all that 

794 



luid aot been stolen or torn to shreds. Gabriel sent to fetch 
them before they had finished. 

Then, stilh early that morning, the curtain was again drawn 
back, and there stood two men with Maink Antaram. But 
these were two young men, in blue uniforms, with sparklmg 
bi|ttons and Red Cross bands round their left arms. Juliette, 
sdfi on her back, saw two chubby, rosy, male faces, with clear, 
merry eyes. A delicious, startled commotion at the sight of 
the inexpressibly akin went shuddering through her. The 
shorter the two young men saluted her stiiBy; his brotherly 
voice spoke the sounds of a vanished world: “Sorry to disturb 
you, Madame. We’re the hospital orderlies of the Gutchen. 
We have orders from the head-surgeon to carry Madame down 
with all the rest. We’ll be back later. Would Madame be so 
good as to be ready 

And the htde fellow drew himself up, his hand went up in 
salute to his sailor’s cap, while the other, with clumping, em- 
barrassed steps, came on into the tent to set down a thermos 
flask beside the looking-glass, a dish of butter, and two rolls 
of fine white bread. “Head-surgeon’s orders, tea, bread, butter, 
for Madame, just to go on with , . 

He announced it like the progress of a battle, clicking his 
heels aa4 turning his snub-nosed, chubby proBle towards the 
bed, without appearing to see the woman on it. A deliciously 
clumsy boy! But Juliette emitted a whispering sigh, where- 
upon the two hospital orderlies, feeling that perhaps they dis- 
turbed the patient, clumped out of the tent on noisy tiptoe. 
They followed Mairik Antaram to the hospital-hut,'which the 
flames had spared. There the whole hospital staffs of the bat- 
tleships had collected, with stretchers, to carry sick and 
wounded down to the coast. 

Juliette stretched out two nostalgic arms towards her vanish- 
ing compatriots, and then flung off the sheet. She sat up on the 
edge of the bed. Her chrysahs sheath had split at last. Cover- 
ing her face with both hands, she ran fingers through her 

795 



wildly tousled hair. In horror, she whispered: “Frenchmenl 
Frenchmen! What do I look like! Frenchmen!” 

And then it was as though, in this dried-up body, there shot 
to life a pillar of the old, flaming energy. She sat down before 
the glass. Her stiff, shaky fingers confused every objet de 
toilette that the dressing-table still displayed. She daubed on 
rouge, without having rubbed off the face cream, and so 
looked more sickly and withered than ever.. She worked away 
at her head with a brush and comb, whispering: “What do I 
look like*” again and again. She was too weak to manage to 
put her hair up. Then she put her head down on her arms and 
began to sob quite uncontrollably. But self-pity as usual proved 
so soothing that its soft caress made her forget she had any 
hair, and she left it hanging. A new, sharp panic. “French- 
men! Frenchmen! What have I got to put on I” She began 
to look about for her things, the wardrobe-trunk, all the 
other luggage — nothing! The tent was empty! Juliette rushed 
like a mad thing round and round those few square yards. 
It was the old nightmare. She was being forced to attend a 
soiree, the most brilliant soir&, in her nightgown, with bare 
feet. After long, vain searchings, she ventured to put her nose 
outside the tent. The clear, gold September sunlight nearly 
drove her into it again. But the next minute she w4s.on her 
knees by the wardrobe-trunk. . . . Who’d played this dirty, 
common trick on her^ Iskuhi’’ Everything was in ribbons, 
crumbled, turned inside out. Not one frock, of all those faded, 
last year’s rags. Juliette had nothing to wear! And yet she 
must look her best, since these were Frenchmen! , 

Mairik Antaram found Juliette sitting on the ground, amid 
neaps of such slips, stockings, frocks, and shoes as the de- 
serters had left her. She was too exhausted to move, but she 
clamoured obstinately: “The French are here! The French 
are here! What have I got to put on.? . . .” 

Mairik Antaram stared at the mvahd, unable to believe her 
ears. Was it conceivable that this woman, who scarcely had 

796 



managed to say a word ever since she had ceased to be de* 
lirious, the woman who had put forth all her strength to de- 
fend herself against the horror of knowledge— that now her 
mind could so run on clothes^ But slowly Antaram under- 
stood. It was not vanity. Why, her brothers were commgl 
She was shy, she wanted to be worthy of them! Madame 
Altouni knelt beside Juliette and, in her turn, rummaged 
among gay heaps. But whatever she picked out made Juliette 
angry. After a long time, during which the invalid, in this 
curious fashion, defied her fate, and Mairik Antaram dis- 
played celestial patience, a frock found acceptance at last. To 
be sure it was a stiff and formal frock, lace-trimmed at the 
opening round the throat. While the old woman, who really 
had little skill in such subtle arts, was with the greatest diffi- 
culty helping the almost inanimate Juliette to get into it, the 
patient moaned. “It’s all wrong!” 

But would any frock have been the right one in which to 
welcome rescuing brothers, since for broken lives there can 
be no rescuer? 

Gabriel hurried on ahead to prepare her for the rear-admiral’s 
visit. She was sitting on the edge of her bed when he reached 
her. Mairik was holding a cup of tea and petting the refractory 
Juliette as though she were a spoilt child. “If you want to 
look your best for the Frenchmen, you must keep up your 
strength, dear, or all your clothes will be no use . . .” 

Juliette stood up with formality as though a stranger had 
come in, whom she must follow. Mairik Antaram left the tent 
with a glance from one to the other of them. She took one of 
the rolls, since she herself was nearly dead with hunger. Ga- 
briel saw his old life; it confronted him in a livid flash of per- 
ception, and he knew that the way back to it could not be 
bridged. This old life was wearing a stiff, taffeta frock, every 
movement of which rusded with memories. But the cheeks 
and limbs of the old life were shrunken and colourless; its form 

797 



could scarcely keep upright and aroused aunpassion in him. 
How close to him she had still been as an invalid! Only now, 
as he saw her in formal silks, could he measure the gulf of the 
forty days. He had to talk to her very guardedly: “Thank 
God, my dear, you’re almost as you us^ to be . . 

He asked if she felt she had the strength to come a fow 
st^s to meet the admiral of the French squadron. He was sure 
she would not want to receive him here, in this dark sick- 
tent. Juliette looked round the place which so recendy she had 
chosen to be her sepulchre. Then she put out her hands in a 
queer litde gesture of longing for her lace-edged pillow, 
Gabriel took her by the arm. 

“You’ll have all your things there with you tonight, Juliette. 
They shan’t forget anything.’’ 

But Juliette, in spite of this appeasement, turned again at 
the door of her tent, hke Eurydice, towards the dark. 

The admiral came with only his adjutant and a young 
officer. He had been warned not to come too close to this 
convalescent. The infectious fever on Musa Dagh was appar- 
ently a very dangerous species. But the admiral was a valiant 
seaman, on whom warnings usually had the contrary effect. 
In his stiff htde steps, whi^ over-emphasized those of youth, 
he came to her and kissed her hand, “You too, Madame, as a 
Frenchwoman, a stranger, have played a considerable part in 
the sufferings and heroic deeds on this moimtain. Permit me 
to wish you a speedy recovery.” 

“And France, Monsieur?” 

“France is in the midst of terrible trials, Madame, and must 
hope that God will show her His mercy.” 

The sight of Juliette really seemed to perturb the old gen- 
tleman. He took her shrivelled hand between both his. “Do 
you know, mon enfant, that this must be the first time I’ve 
set eyes on you, since you grew up. . . . You must have been 
quite a httle girl the 1^ time, when 1 spent a whole day with 
your parents not long after they marri^. I was never a very 

798 



indmate friend of your fadier's, but I thinlc that, when we 
were young men, we frequented more or less the same 
world. . . 

Juliette let out a little sob, but it brought no tears; only 
strange, disconnected chatter: “But naturally ... the house 
was sold after Papa’s death . . . and Maman . . . Maman 
Ktcs now . . . Ah! I forget the streetl . . . You know noth- 
ing of her. Monsieur? But probably you’ll know my 
brother-in-law. ... I mean the one in the ^nistry of Marine 
... a high official . . . What is his name? . . . My head! 
Coulomb, of course, Jacques Coulomb. . . . You know him? 
I so seldom see my sister. . . . But when I get back to Paris, 
I shall see all my friends again, n’est<e pas? . . . You will 
take me to Paris?” 

Juliette tottered. The admiral lent her his support. Gabriel 
ran into the tent for a chair. The invalid sat. But weak as she 
was, she could still chatter. Presumably she felt herself obliged 
to make conversation. Her gabble became suffer every min- 
ute, more like a parrot. She mentioned more and more people, 
mutual acquaintance, so she supposed. Her talk jumped dis- 
connectedly from one to another of them. 

The old seaman grew more and more uncomfortable. At last 
he called to one of his young men: "Mon ami. you’ll see to 
everything and accompany Madame on board. The Jeanne 
d * Arc is a warship, so you mustn’t expect to be too comfort- 
able. Wc’llMo everything wc possibly can to render your soy- 
age agreeable^ my dear ^ild.” 

Even when the admiral, accompanied some of the way by 
Gabriel, had departed, juhette’s parrot-voice stUl chattered on. 
The young officer, left by his chief to escort and protect, sat 
nervously eyeing those poor pale bps, out of which spluttered 
endless questions which he could not answer. And the shad- 
ows under Juliette’s eyes grew deeper. The officer was very 
rdlieved when Bagradian came, and then in a few more mior 
utes the marines, who carried a stretcher. 

799 



At first Juliette struggled against it. “I won’t lie down on 
that. What a horror! I’d far rather walk.” 

“You can’t, Juliette. Be reasonable now, and lie down. Be- 
lieve me, I shouldn’t mind being carried down in one myself.” 

The two pink and white faces smiled encouragement. 
'“Don’t be afraid, Madame, we’ll carry you as though you 
were glass. You won’t feel a thing!” 

Juliette surrendered and, on the stretcher, lay perfeedy still, 
as she had before. Gabriel brought out a ru^, put her beloved 
cushion under her head, and gave her hand-bag to the officer. 
He stroked her hair. “Don’t worry. . . . Nothing that matters 
will be left ” 

He broke off suddenly. The officer glanced at him inquir- 
ingly. Gabriel nodded. The stretcher-bearers lifted her up, took 
the first steps. An excited Sato waited a little way off, to act 
as guide. 

“I’ll soon have caught up with you,” shouted Gabriel. 

Juhette shifted round so vehemently, that the stretcher- 
bearers stopped and put her down. A mad, twitching face 
turned back to Gabriel, and a voice screamed — a voice he had 
never heard her use: “I say! Stephan . . . Look after Ste- 
phan I” 

In deliverance even, the cup of sorrow was not full. A loud 
voice kept calhng from the Tomasian tent: “Gabriel Bagrad- 
lan! Come along, man!” 

Gabriel had supposed Iskuhi to be with her sick brother. 
She was nowhere about. He went into Aram’s tent. Bygones 
had now become absurdly indifferent. He found the pastor 
excited and feverish. 

“Where’s Iskuhi, Gabriel Bagradian, for Christ’s sake! 
Where have you left Iskuhi?” 

“Iskuhi ? she was with me for a time after midnig ht up on 
the howitzer emplacement. Then I asked her to go to my 
wife.” 


800 



"That’s just it!” shouted the pastor. “This morning I was 
still perfectly certain that Iskuhi was with you in the line; 
She hasn’t come back — she’s disappeared. . . . I’ve sent out 
to look for her. . . . They’ve been looking hours for her. . . . 
The French stretcher-bearers have been waiting a long time 
to carry me down. But I won’t leave the mountain without 
Iskuhi*. ... If anything’s happened to her ... I won’t leave 
the mountain at all.” 

He caught hold of Gabriel’s arm and pulled hunself up, in 
spite of his wound. “It’s my fault, Bagradian — I can’t explain 
to you now— but I’m the guilty one. It’s only )ust that God 
should be punishing me personally in my child and sister, 
after He’s saved us all. And my wife was also the insfument 
of His justice.” 

“Where is your wife?” asked Gabriel steadily. 

“She’s gone running down to the beach. With the child. 
They told her there was some milk down there. I couldn’t 
keep her.” 

His excitement got the bettec of the wounded Tomasian. 
He tried to get up, but fell back at once. “Damnation' You 
see I can do nothing! I can’t move. Do something, Gabriel 
Bagradian! It’s partly your sin with Iskuhi. . . . Even 
you . . .” 

“Wait*, Pastor I’ll go.” 

Gabriel said this in a weary voice. He moved off across 
Three-Tent Square and then some way further. He did not 
get far, but sat down somewhere to stare up at the sky. One 
thought trailed through his weary mind: So this is what it 
means to be saved! He tried to recall his talk with Iskuhi in 
the night. But his mind had kept no details, only a spectral 
breath of resignation. She had come to remind him of his 
promise to be with her at the very end. But he had turned 
her away, sent her to Juliette. Iskuhi must be somewhere safe. 
Had not that been his thought^ But she had wanted some- 
thing he could not give, a resolute, happy belief in their de> 

8oi 



ttruction. He had had to rob her a£ that ooan^eooa 
Where was Iskubi now? Gabriel could not have sud vdittt 
made him so certain that Iskuhi was no longer alive. 

Gabriel was wrong. Iskubi lived. Even as be set to his lips 
the whistle which should summon further help, Kevork the 
dancer had discovered her. Only just in time! The sole'a- 
planation was that Iskuhi must have lost her way in the dark 
on the stamped-out path, and so fallen into a little ravine, or 
rather a hollow, not very deep, overgrown with shrubs. Cer* 
tainly this hollow was some way off any beaten track, on the 
very uneven ground which leads up to Dish Terrace. But 
what it was she had sought m that spectral region, between 
midnight and morning, no one could say. No harm had come 
to her, more than a few scratches on arms and legs; no wound, 
no broken bones, not even a shock, not even a sprain. Yet this 
fall in the dark had turned that state of deadly weakness, 
against which she had struggled for days, yet cherished, to 
hnal collapse. When Kevork carried her in, in arms which 
had certainly known very different burdens, she was fully con- 
scious, had huge, almost merry eyes, but could not speak. 
Luckily among the hospital orderlies who had still the last 
patients to carry down, there was a young second surgeon 
of the Gmchen. He gave Iskuhi a strong heart-stimulant, but 
insisted that it was urgendy necessary to get her on board as 
soon as possible to avoid the worst. So without delay or many 
words both Iskuhi and Pastor Tomasian were strapped on the 
stretchers. Gabriel had scarcely dme to give Kristaphor orders 
that, as soon as the luggage had been moved out, the thre^ 
tents and everything in them were to be set on fire without 
delay. 

Gabkiel kept close beside Iskuhi, as often as it was possible 
to do so. But the path was almost too narrow for one man, 
and in places where the bare rock-wall opened out on their 
right, the bearers had all they could do to get past, with their 

802 



IbadEl. Just jJlead o£ dum swayed the wouoded pastor. TAuM 
ouae next^ with the young doctor. But she was not the last 

the procession, since three men crippled with wounds from 
the fight of August 23, and a woman in labour, brought up 
the tear. Behind these again a swarm of stragglers, men from 
tl^ d<^d8 who had been to what was left of their family huts 
to rake about in the ashes for anything the fire might have 
spared. The bearers halted two or three times on the wider 
ledges for a rest. Then Gabriel bent down over Iskuhi. But 
he himself could scarcely speak. And two paces further lay 
Pastor Aram. The doctor kept returning every minute to make 
Iskuhi take a sip of milk, or feel her pulse. 

Gabriel whispered disconnectedly: “Where were you trying 
to get to, Iskuhi? . . . What were you after . . . out 
there? . . 

Her eyes answered: "Why are you asking me something I 
don’t know? ... It was as though I hovered up off the 
ground. . . . We’ve scarcely any time left, less than we had 
in the night.” 

He knelt beside her and put his hand under her head, as 
though this would make her speak. Yet his own words were 
scarcely audible: “Any pain, Iskuhi?” 

He* eyes understood him at once and answered : “No, I don’t 
feel my body. But what really hurts me is that this should have 
happened as it has. Wouldn’t it have been better without this 
ship? This is a kind of end, but not ours, Gabriel. , . 

Gabriel’s eyes could neither speak nor perceive as Iskuhi’s 
could. And so, therefore, he said something entirely false: 
“This is just a collapse, Iskuhi. . . . It’s because you’ve had 
nothing to cat.” And, turning to the surgeon, he spoke French: 
‘Isn’t it. Doctor ? In three days, when we’ve got to Port Said, 
you’ll be feeling ever so much better. You’re still so young, 
so young, Iskuhi.” 

Her eyes darkened and answered sternly: “At a moment 
like this you ought not to be saying such banal things to me^ 

803 



Gabriel. I don’t in the least mind whether I die or go on 
living. You’re wrong if you think I want to die. Perhaps I 
shall live. But can’t you see it’ll all be different, once the ships 
have taken us on board; even for us it will. We can oidy 
really be together for as long as we’ve still the earth of Musa 
Dagh under our feet; you as my love, I as your sister.” ^ 

Not all, but much of this, Gabriel seemed to have under- 
stood. His next whisper came out hesitant, like the mirrored 
echo of what her eyes said: “Yes, where will we be . . . you 
and I . . . sister?” 

Her lips opened at last, to form two syllables, their passion 
contradicted all she had said: “With you . . .” 

The stretchers were lifted again for the easy remainder of 
the way. Already many voices had arisen. Down on the beach, 
on the narrow ledges, there was a dangerous crowding and 
jostling, made still worse by the many sailors who, on various 
pretexts, had got shore-leave. Embarcation was already in full 
swing, a hundred times entangled confusion, and wild yelling. 
Gabriel was besieged on all sides with demands, requests, 
questions, petitions. The people, for no reason, had made of 
him the secret worker of this miracle by which they were 
saved. And now, as the kinsman of mighty France, the man 
sent by God, it would still be his business to go on, helping 
his fellow<ountrymen m their exile far from Musa Dagh. 
His former enemies on the Council, Thomas Kebussyan, and 
his lady, with the quick mouse-eyes, most urgent of all, could 
not now show him enough obsequious cringing He had to 
fight his way on through a flood of excited demands for pro» 
tection. So that when, at last, he came to the landing-stage, 
the boat with Aram and Iskuhi had put off, ahead of all 
others, by order of the officer in charge of sick-transport. 
Juhette, too, had long been taken on board the Jeanne d’Arc 
in the admiral’s motor-boat. The sunlight glared off the sea 
in unbearably dazzling splintered rays. Many boats were on 
their way to the ships, others were moving along the coast. 

804 



Ickuhi lay hidden in hers. Gabriel could make out only the 
rigid shape of Hovsannah, clutching to her breast her nuser- 
able bun^e, the qmct first-born of Musa 0agh. 

The embarcation proceeded slowly. There were many diflS- 
culties to surmount. Though a good half of the villagers might 
easily have been taken aboard the troop-ship, the doctors 
unanimously opposed this easy solution of the room problem. 
It would be far too risky to herd together hundreds of people 
in close proximity to their sick. It must, on the contrary, be 
so managed, that only these sick, the enfeebled, the doubtful 
cases, the waifs and strays, were shipped on the transport 
steamer. They must be kept well apart from the crews and 
from healthy Armenians. The wretched troop-ship, therefore, 
in contrast to the warships — even more to the splendid Jeanne 
d’Arc — was a Gehenna, an abode of woe, of destitute flotsam 
and jetsam. A special medical commission, composed of doc- 
tors and naval oflicers, examined every single Armenian for 
lice and disease before he was classified. Its methods were 
very severe. Anyone in the least doubtful was banished at once 
to the transport. Ter Haigasun was the only one of the former 
leaders on Musa Dagh with a seat on this classification board. 
Bcdrds'Altouni’s strength had ebbed precariously in the course 
of the day. The head-surgeon had long since shipped him on 
the Guichen. The mukhtars, too, seemed to regard their term 
of office as at an end. They had retired into private life, as 
the fathers of families. Nor did the teachers, or any of the 
subordinate village priests, consider this a concern of theirs. 
They had ceased to worry. 

So that only Ter Haigasun remained to defend the interests 
of the people, that is to say to persuade the officers and doctors 
not to separate families unnecessarily, and to see to it that 
even the troop-ship got the right passengers. 

Gabriel approached the medical board, which functioned 
not far from the landing-jetty. He put his two hands on Ter 

805 



Haigasun’s dxHilders. Ter Haigasun turned. Hia face 
quietly waxen again as ever. Only his singed beard and 
burn on his cheek told of the last events on the Damlayik. 
diyly resolute eyes remained fixed on Gabriel It had seldom 
happened in all these days: “Good that you’ve come, Gabriel 
Bagradian; I’ve something to ask yoU'.’’ • * 

Ter Haigasun was speaking very quietly, though certainly 
the French would never have understood Ids Armenian. “TIm 
two worst scoundrels have disappeared, I mean Oskanian arid 
Kilikian; and some others as well ...” 

“Kilikian’s dead,” said Gabriel atid the thought did not 
worry him in the least. 

A brief glmt in Ter Haigasun’s eyes seemed to indicate that 
he understood. He pointed across to the flat rock, where a 
knot of Armenian men stood herded together. “Well, this is 
my question. Have those scoundrels over there any right to be 
saved? Oughtn’t I to drive them back?” 

Gabriel took a second or so to answer. “Had we any right 
to be saved? And who’s doing the saving? Anyway, we, the 
saved, haven’t the right to exclude anyone from s^ety.” 

Ter Haigasun’s eyes were twinkling. “Good. I only wanted 
to make certain . . .” 

The priest was now no longer the sorry sight he had been 
that morning. A ship’s chapl^ had supphed a coat. His old 
trick of hiding his hands in his sleeves forced them, with an 
unaccustomed movement, mto his pockets. “I’m glad, Gabriel 
Bagradian, to find that we still agree about everything as we 
always did.” ' ' 

And now his smile had almost a look of embarrassed tender* 
ness. Gabriel stood a long time to watch the co mmiss ion. Since 
his thoughts were far from it, he saw only empty coming and 
gwng. 

At last Ter Haigasun turned, in some surprise. “Still heie^ 
Gabriel Bagradian? The motor*launch for the Jeanne ^Are 
has put out agam. . . . Look! You shouldn’t stop here help* 

8o5 



log 111& Your duty’s finished, lifine isn’t, yet. So go with God’s 
Uessing and rest. 1 diall be on die Guichen." 

Something in Gabriel impeded any final leave^aking. “Per- 
haps I’ll be back here later to look for you, Ter Haigasun.” 

He pushed his way back through the waiting crowds and 
went -aimlessly a few paces up towards the mountain path. 
Avakian came down it to meet him. After him Kristaphor, 
Missak, Kevork, dragging the Bagradian trunks. The faithful 
Avakian had saved everything which human strength and 
ingenuity could manage to drag down this steep path. Only 
the bedding and the furniture had been left to burn in the 
tents. 

Gabriel laughed. “Hullo, Avakian! Why all these exertions? 
This looks like a pleasure trip up the Nile.” 

Reproachfully, through nickel-rimmed glasses, the student 
gazed at his employer with the eyes of a poor man who knows 
the value of things better than the unsuspecting rich. 

But Gabriel put his arm mto the tutor’s, and held him fast. 
“Avakian, there’s something more I want you to do for me. 
I’ve been thinking all this time how we can manage it. I’m 
endlessly in need of rest. I must have it. And it’s just what I 
shan’t get in the next few days. The admiral has asked me to 
sit at’his table. So that for hours on end I shall have to talk 
to indifferent strangers, tell them stories, brag, or pretend to 
be modest, all equally tinng. Anyway, another prison! And 
I won't do it! You understand, Avakian? I refuse! At least 
for these three days I’ll be alone — entirely alone. And so I’ve 
decided not to go on the Jeanne d’Arc, but on the troop-ship. 
There there’ll be only a few officers. They’ll be bound to give 
me a berth to niysel^ and I diall rest.” 

Samuel Avakian seemed horrified. “But, Effendi, the troop- 
ship is certain to be kept in quarantine.” 

“Well, I’m not a&aid of quarantine." 

“But wouldn’t it be another prison, which might last even 
longer than forty days?” 


807 



“If I really want it, they’ll let me out.” 

Avakian sought hesitant objections. “Won’t you be hurtii^ 
the admiral, who, after all, is our good angel?” 

“That’s just It. And this is where I want you to help me, 
Avakian. You must go to him at once in my name, and 
apologize with some really convincing reason. Tell him the 
troop-ship has some of our most undependable people on board, 
people without prospects. And say there’s been no time to get 
the thing properly organized. T^ him there must be some- 
body there who can guarantee to keep people like that in order. 
Say I’ve undertaken it. . . .” 

Avakian did not seem in the least convinced. But now Ga- 
briel insisted: “It’s really quite a good reason. You needn’t 
worry. An old sailor like that will perfectly well understand 
a scruple of that kind. He just won’t give it another thought, 
believe me. Well — do it, Avakian, please!” 

The student still hesitated. “So we aren’t going to meet for 
the next few days?” 

These words sounded anxious. But Gabriel glanced across 
at the embarcation jetty. “Time to go, Avakian* The motor- 
launch of the Jeanne d'Arc mustn’t have to make any more 
journeys. Stick to those papers of mine for the present.” 

The motor-launch was signalling impatiently. AVakian 
scarcely had time to shake Gabriel’s hand. Gabriel watched 
him go, lost in thought. Then he asked one of the officers 
what time the last boat would leave for the troop-ship. Most 
patients were on board, he was told, the rest, those told off 
to travel on her, would be shipped last of all. That may gift 
on for hours, thought Gabri^ watching the dense crowd 
which still pushed and shoved round the isolation commission 
on the landing-place. He felt rather pleased and rejoiced to 
know himself free of the admiral and life on board the Jeanne 
d’Arc. He lounged away towards the mountain path. Since he 
had so long to wait, it would be a relief to get far from these 
sounds of cackhng women, the glare of this September sun, 

808 



into shadows and quiet. Gabriel had to pass the place where 
the busy herded, waiting, sent there to be, out of the way of 
the more favoured. Many of them, especially the churchyard 
folk, had gone there at once to avoid the trouble of submitting 
themselves to inspection for hcc. Bagradian watched his future 
fclloW-passengers. Sato grinned, ran a bit of the way with him, 
and stuck out a begging paw. She had never done it in Yogho- 
noluk. A few contrite deserters sprang up eagerly. Nunik 
and the other keening-women sat on sacks whose mouldy 
treasures they intended to carry off to another continent. They 
held long staffs in their left hands, with the right they touched 
their breasts, lips, foreheads, to greet the master, Gabriel Ba* 
gradian, the last, the son of Mesrop, grandson of Avetis Ba- 
gradian, the great benefactor and founder of churches. But in 
him Nunik, the timeless, beheld the child at whose birth she 
secretly had worked a magic, carefully hidden away from 
Bedros Hekim, traced crosses on walls and lintel with her sis, 
to drive off devils. The bhnd, white-headed prophets crouched 
on the rock, gently singing to themselves. Thick clusters of 
flies were on their eyelids, and they did not trouble to drive 
them off. Unmoved by what had been, untroubled by what 
was p come, these prophets sang in their low voices. They 
scarcely cared to ask how all this had happened; having lost 
no homes, they followed only the rumours in their minds, and 
let Nunik, Wartuk, Manushak, the guides of the blind, lead 
them, wherever they might choose. Their frail hummings 
sounded pleasantly mournful, with rapturous, high-pitched, 
treble quaverings. 

Yet this was the sound which made Gabriel’s heart sink. 
It lured Stephan to his side. He climbed on and on up the 
path as far as he could get from the song of the bhnd. But in 
exchange he had soon to hsten to Juliette’s parrot-chaitcr all 
over again, and then to her scream: “Look after StephanI’’ He 
went on, faster and faster, thmking too deeply to know his 
thoughts. At last he stopped in surprise; he had come so far 

809 



tibe mountain. But this seemed a pleasant enot^h ^KiC. A 
natural rock-seat, shaded with myrde and arbutus, with: a 
mossy back to it. Here, in this pleasant place, he sank down. 
From here he could see everything below him, the swarm on 
the rocky beach, the five blue-grey, motionless ships, fast 
soldered to their thick waves. The troopship was the faftheft 
out to sea. The Gutchen, with Iskuhi, was the next. The 
pastor’s fishing-raft had been roped in firmly to the rocks. 
Over it the marines had set a plank-bndge. The rescued mul- 
titude shuffled in single file, down the long plank, to reach 
the boats. Often the whole contraption began to sway, spray 
flew up, and the women screeched. This picture put every- 
thing dse to Eight. The swarm still looked as big as ever. “I’ve 
a long, long time," thought Gabriel. But that he ought never 
to have thought. Nor should he have sunk down in this pleas- 
ant place, any more than a half-frozen man should lie down 
in snow. The embarcation dimmed before his eyes. God spread 
a mighty sleep over Bagradian. This sleep was made up of all 
the strain, all the watchful nights, of the forty days. Against 
it there was no longer will nor strength. 

A mother whose child can no longer keep its eyelids fiom 
shutting says of it: “He’s dropping with sleep.’’ Gabritd Ba- 
gradian was dropping with the sleep of the dead. 



7 


To the Inexplicable in Us and above Usl 

Five ships’ sirens hooted. Their entangled notes were various: 
short, du-eatening, hollow. Gabriel quietly opened his eyes. He 
looked down for the swarming ant-heap which he imagined he 
had seen a minute ago. Surf leapt more angrily than it had 
on an empty beach. The raft was beginning to come apart 
The Guichen had already turned her course. Her bows, run- 
ning south-west, cut a deep foam-cleft m the sea. The other 
ships of the squadron were ahead of her. Like heavy, yet 
gracefully purposeful dancers, they strove to execute a perfect 
figure. At Its centre, the Jeanne d’Arc slowly manoeuvred. Ga- 
briel watched all this attentively. Only then did he think: And 
Ter Haigasun? Didn’t he notice? No! He thinks I’m on the 
Jeanne d’Arc. Gabriel jumped up and began to shout, with sig- 
nallidg» arms. But his voice would not carry, and the move- 
ments were not those of a desperate man. Just then the sun 
struck the jutting rocks of Ras el-Khanzir, and the high clifis 
of Musa Dagh lay deep in shadow. All reason should have 
sent Bagradian Hying out to the rocks, to climb the furthest of 
them, and use any means to get himself seen. The deck of the 
Guichen was thronged with Armenians, leaning over the rail, 
to watch their mountain out of sight, which seemed to lower 
darkly over them with the glumness of a murderer balked of 
his prey. Though the sea might be breathmg loud, the screw 
throbbing someone on deck, or in the observation-turret, 
would surely have seen Gabrid Bagradian. But the wretched 
Gabrid not only refused to leave his shadowy place, he even 

8x1 



stopped his cries and signallings, as though grown tired 
su(^ vain formality. A man placed as he was ought surely to 
have shouted for help like a madman; he ought to have hurled 
himself into the sea, swum after, been fished out, or drowned, 
if necessary. The ships seemed to move so slowly. There was 
still ume. " * 

Gabriel could not understand his own calm. Was he drowsy 
still? The flask which the Frenchman filled with cafe and 
cognac for him still lay on the pleasant rock where he had sat. 
He drank long gulps to make himself feel desperate. They 
had ]ust the opposite effect. His blood quickened, his muscles 
began to feel more alive, but his peace remained, just as before. 
No cries. No deathly panic. He felt joyous, consoled. The 
earthy, the material Gabriel was ashamed. I’ll climb to a 
higher point with a clearer outlook and wave my coat. But 
there was no sense in doing that. Gabnel was merely making 
excuses to hide his intentions from himself. He was impelled 
to climb, not to descend. And, naturally, he was still thinking: 
What shall I live on? He felt in his overcoat pockets. Three 
rolls and two bars of chocolate, that was all. No food at all in 
his jacket pockets, the map of the Damlayik, a few old letters 
and notes, an empty cigarette-case, and then, Agha Rifaat 
Bereket’s coin, with the Greek mscription. He kept his hold of 
this golden object. Then he remembered that on the evening 
of the great exodus, he had turned back to the villa to get 
the coins. How much better to have left them. And it felt as 
though now, at the very last, he would throw the amulet 
away. He did not, but pocketed it again, and began to ponder' 
the inscription. Not in the carhest day of the defence had 
Gabriel felt so strong and well. Every trace of fatigue had 
gone out of his legs, his knees felt supple, his heart was not 
beating a jot faster than usual, so that, before he knew hoW 
it had happened, he had come out on to a free ledge, high 
above the sea. Gabriel walked to the end of the jutting point, 
to wave his greatcoat in wide circles round his head. Bu<t 

8x2 



scarcely had he even begun to do this when he let his arms 
drop to his sides again. And now in one clear flash, he real* 
ized— that he did not want the ships to see htm. That his being 
here was no unlucky accident, but the deepest decision; not 
God’s decision only, but his. 

, How was that? He could find no trace of warped emotion 
or sensibility in himself. His mind was as clear as his heart 
was peaceful. He even felt at last that a long, dense lethargy 
had fallen away. Everything in him longed for final settlement, 
with a consciousness of power he had never known. 

He left his place overlooking the sea. His body, aware of 
its own lightness, bore him in long, active strides up the rough 
track, no more than a stamped-out zigzag, between walls of 
rock, in among crevices, along water<ourses marked with 
stones and logs to show the way. But the clarity even of Ga- 
briel’s senses was so acute that it was not necessary to heed 
either the landmarks or these dangers. He knew that, with 
so heightened a consciousness, he could make no false step, 
fall down no precipice. His pulse and perceptions worked to- 
gether. This bit of the way was a proud settlement of accounts. 
He could see now why, that morning, when the miracle 
thundered from off the sea, he had felt a kind of disappoint- 
ment! fdere was the reason why he had felt such mystenous 
discomfort when the admiral said that they would land the 
people of Musa Dagh, and him with them, in Alexandria or 
Port Said. That discomfort had in it the germ of this instant’s 
super-resolution. In those first minutes of general safety he had 
sensed at once that for him such return to life would be im- 
possible, merely because the real Bagradian, the Bagradian 
come to life in the forty days, would have had to be saved. 
Saved for Port Said or Alexandria? For some camp for Ar- 
menian refugees? Saved, to exchange Musa Dagh for a nar- 
rower and lower pen-fold. To chmb down from this suprem- 
acy of decision, into serfdom, and wait for another miracle? 
I^?hy? An old saying of Bedros Altouni came back to him. 



To be an Aimeman is an imposabilttyt Qi^ trtfet ’ 

brid had done whh impossibilidet. Titt one thing posnife ' 
fiHed him from t<^ to toe with incredible certainty. He had 
shared in the destiny of his blood. He had led the struggle (d 
his own villagers. But was not the new Gabriel more than pait 
of a blood-stream? Was he not more than an Armenian? 
Once he had thought of himself as “abstract,” as an “individ- 
ual.” He had had to pass through the pen-fold of a c ommune 
really to become so. That was it, that was why he could feel 
so incredibly freel A cosmic hermitage. The thing for which, 
that morning, he had so longed. Now he had found it, as no 
other mortal ever hadi Every breath was an intoxication of 
freedom. The ships departed, and Gabriel stayed on this rocky 
slope of Musa Dagh, which rose sheer and empty, as though 
just created. Only God — and Gabriel Bagradian. And Gabriel 
was, by the grace of God, more real than all people or any 
nation. 

Then, at the summit of his pride came a hint of weakness. 
Women! Where women are there is guilt in men. Gabriel 
had returned to that gende slope where the stretchers halted 
to rest, and Iskuhi’s eyes spoke farewells to him. Yet he saw 
no Iskuhi here, but Juliette, in her stiff taffeta edged with 
lace. What would become of her? Gabriel stood for a while 
looking out to sea. Those ships sailed so slowly. They had 
still not reached the central spaces midway to the high horizon. 
Perhaps men on the look-out might see him still if he waved 
his coat above his head. But another thought had come into 
his mind. Juliette would be free, and so could easily get back 
her French nadonahty. Once it was found that he was miss- 
ing, the admiral and everyone about her would be kindneiK 
itself to Juliette. This clear reflortion increased his liberty still 
more. Now he went on more carefully, bending his head a 
little forwards up the stone slope, to where the track opened 
out among trees and bushes. Gabriel had passed two fmdber 
bends in it before his heart stood suddenly still. Was it po»> 



Had Ideahi really hidden somewhere^ at the last min* 
nte^ to stay hdiind with him? This seemed £or the next few 
aeomds by no means the work of imagination. He could sense 
her even. And then Iskuhi’s st^s came after him. He could 
hear the sharp, clear tapping of her heels. Where, shall we be, 
you and I, sister? She had kept her word. “With you.” He 
(Sid dot look rotmd, but went hurrying on a bng way, then 
stopped. Iskuhi’s light and equal steps came after. They were 
unmistak able. Clearer and clearer, a woman’s steps coming up 
the slope. The path rustled with shifting stones, they went 
scurrying downwards. Gabriel waited. Iskuhi must have 
reached him by now. But her heels still tapped, they were 
neither nearer nor farther oil. So that at last he guess^ that 
Iskuhi’s footsteps were not outside him, but within. His hand 
slipped down along his body, to find his watch. When he 
pulled it out, it ticked so loudly as no longer to sound like a 
woman’s footsteps, but the sharp strokes of a fine hammer on 
rock. Solitude exaggerated the noise. Or was this Gabriel’s own 
particular time, rising in intensity with his life? 

He had still the watch in his hand as the shadows cleared 
ftw a final certainty. That sleep of his had been no ordinary 
deep. That sleep had been preordained to assist his weakness, 
so that his fate might be fulfilled. Without it he would have 
sunk back into the world. But for him God intended other- 
wise. When had that been? Was it imagination, or had he 
really spoken the words: “For some time now. I’ve known 
with the stoniest conviction that God intends to use me in 
some way.” Now he knew the whole depths of that intention. 
Nbw it was no longer merely freedom, comfort, and joy that 
filled his heart No, something new, entirely new, burst into 
consciousness. The ecstasy of supernatural unity, the ghosdy 
ray. My life is guided, and therefore safe. With his arms a 
lit^ apart he wandered on again, on feet that could not feel 
they tr^. The next clearing opened among rocks. The sea-line 
rose higher and higher. The squadron, in the triangular form 

815 



of a stork’s flight, receded gradually into distances. But Ga* 
hdel had ceased to spy out ships. He looked up into the a£ter> 
noon sky; its blue deepened to gold every minute. In this last 
ascent the path was already lost. 

He crossed the belt of myrde and rhododendron bushes. 
Ought he not to have thought of the next few hours, the nigh^ 
a safe place to hide in? Since what mortal man could ‘hope 
to go ou living as he hved now, once it was dark? Nothing 
asked this in him. His feet went along the accustomed ways. 
Three-Tent Square. The tents were not only water- but fire- 
proof and had baffled the flames. Even inside, the fire had not 
done much to them. The beds were still standing. Gabriel 
passed without stopping by Juliette’s tent. He halted at the 
edge of the Town Enclosure, still undecided. He wanted to go 
north, to the mam defences, his work. But he took the op- 
posite direction, towards the howitzer mound. Perhaps he was 
even a little curious to see how the marines had spiked these 
guns. Between the Town Enclosure and the mound stretched 
the wide graveyard. In this sparse earth there had still been 
room for a hundred graves. Those of the first days had un- 
hewn limestone blocks or slabs with inscriptions daubed in 
black. Only a wooden cross marked off the last of them. Ga- 
briel went to Stephan The earth still looked fairly fresh. When 
was It they’d buried him? On the thirtieth day, and today was 
the forty-first. And how long is it since that day when he took 
me by surprise, as I lay here asleep? This time I’m taking him 
by surprise. And we two have Musa Dagh to ourselves again. 
Gabriel did not move from Stephan’s grave, though he thought; 
not only of Stephan but of a hundred incidents in those fights. 
Nothing disturbed his tremendous peace. He scarcely noticed 
there was a sunset. 

Suddenly it was cold and dark. He shook off his thoughts. 
What was that? Five ships’ sirens on differendy entangled 
notes, threatening, long, but so far away. Gabriel picked up 
his overcoat off the ground. They’ve found out I’m not on 

8i6 



board. They’re calling me. Quick, to the Dish Terrace! Light 
a fire there! Perhaps — perhaps. Life raged within him. He took 
one step, and started back. They were creeping in on him, in a 
half-circle. Were these wild dogs? No eyes gleamed through 
the dark. Gabriel prefendcd not to have noticed, looked up in 
the air, went back another step and ducked, behind Stephan’s 
grave. Bdt unexpected shots Hashed out from the side; one, 
two, three volleys. 

Gabriel Bagradian was lucky. The second Turkish bullet 
shattered his temple. He clung to the wood, tore it down 
along with bim.T^e Cross of the Son rested upon his heart 




LIST OF CHARACTERS 


Shdkh Achmed — head of Is- 
lamic order called "The 
Thieves of Hearts" 

Ali Fuad Bey — chief of stafft 
Turkish fourth Army. 

Ali Nassif — Turhtsh gendarme 
of Yoghonolu\. 

Ali Risa Bey — brigadier-gener- 
al, Turkish army. 

Dr. Bedros Altoum — physician 
to the seven villages. 

Antaram Altouni — "Moinl^^ An- 
taram" wife of Dr. Altoum, 

Margoss Arzrum — sd^^weaver, 
ducifde of Osl^anian. 

Asajaa—chorister, disciple of 

Krii<ir. 

Samuel Avakian — tutor of 

Stephan Bagradian, and adps- 
tout of Gabriel, 

Aifaod I Bagrathum — ancient 
Armenian \tng (fl. aj). 88$), 

Avetis Bagradian, the elder — 
founder of the family for- 
tune, grandfather of Gabriel. 

Avetis Bagradian, the younger 
— elder brother of Gabriel. 

Gabrid Bagradian. 


Juliette Bagradian — Gabrid^s 

French wife. 

Stephan Bagradian — Gabnefs 
son. 

Captain Brisson — French novtd 
commander. 

Nazareth Chaush — mayor of 
Zeitun. 

D]elal Bey — Wall or civil gov- 
ernor of Syria. 

D]evded Pasha — commander of 
the Turl(tsh army against 
Persia. 

Enver Pasha — Turkey’s Minis- 
ter of War and most popular 
field marshal. 

Cdond von Frankenstein — 
chief of staff, Turkish Fourth 
Army. 

Hagop — a cripple among the 
boys. 

Haik — a leader of the boys and 
the scout corps. 

HoBmann — German vice-consul 
in Alexandretta. 

Hovhanncs — Gabriel Pagra- 

dtan's cooI(. 

Jackson — American Chief Con, 
sul in Aleppo. 



Jemal VxAoe— general com- 

mandmg the Army in Syria. 

Thomas Kebussyan — mayor of 
YogAonolui^. 

Kevork — "ihe sunflower danc- 
er" half-wit refugee from 
Zeitun. 

Sarkis Kilikiaa — deserter from 
the Turkish army. 

Knkor — apothecary of Yogho- 
nolu\. 

Knstaphor — Bagradtan's stew- 
ard. 

Dr. Johannes Lepsius — German 
pastor in charge of Armenian 
rescue worl^. 

Manushak — graveyard dweller, 
spey-wtfe. 

Gonzague Mans — Gree\-Ameri- 
can visitor to Musa Dagh. 

Vahan Melikentz — Armenian 

serving in tnshaat taburt. 

Missah — Gabnel’s valet and 
butler. 

Prof. Nczimi Bey — member of 
the Islamic order, "The 
Thieves of Hearts." 

Harutiun Nokhudian — Protes- 
tant pastor of the village of 
Bitias. 

Nunik — graveyard dweller, 

spey-wtfe. 

Chaush Nurhan — retired ser- 
geant of Yoghon<du\. 


Hrand Odkaidast— dwarf, vil- 
lage schoolmaster. 

Osman — head of femal Pashsfs 
bodyguard. 

Agha Rifaat Bcrcket — old Turl^ 
tsh fnend of Avetis Bagfa- 
dtan and a religious mystic. 

Rbssler — German consul-genend 
in Alexandretta. 

Sato — refugee orphan from Zei- 
tun. 

Monsignor Saven — Armenian 

Patriarch. 

Hapeth Shatakhian — village 

schoolmaster. 

Shushik — a widow, mother of 
Hath, 

Talaat Bey — the Minister of the 
Intenor. 

Ter Haigasun — chief pnest of 
the distnct. 

Tomasian — master-carpenter of 
Yoghonoluh, 

Aram Tomasian — his son, pas- 
tor m Zeitun. 

Hovsannah Tomasian — wife of 
Pastor Aram. 

Iskuhi Tomasian — sister of Pas- 
tor Aram. 

Wartuk — graveyard dweller, 

spey-wife. 

Rev. E. C. Woodley — head of 
the American mission in 
Marash. 


d20 



GLOSSARY OF ARMENIAN 
AND TURKISH TERMS 


Agha — a Ude of great respect. 

Aghil — Turkish sash. 

Ansariyes — Armenoid race of 
Syrian mountaineers whose 
Mohammedanum is consid- 
ered suspect. 

Aiaba — a covered cart, a cab. 

Baksheesh — a gratuity, a tip. 

Bashi — a major. 

Bedel — tax paid in lieu of army 
service. 

Bedouin — nomadic desert Arab. 

Berazik — a little ca^e spread 
with grape syrup. 

governor of a province; 
also a tide of respect for mUt- 
tary officers. 

Bimbashi — a lieutenant-colonel. 

Burnous — a cloahfi^e garment 
and hood woven in one piece, 
worn by Arabs. 

Caliph — litendly the “successor" 
of Mohammed, the spiritual 
and temporal rider of Islam; 
the Sultan of Tur\ey. 

Catholicos — head of the Ar- 
menian Church. 


Charshaffe — the veiled garment 
of Moslem women. 

Chctteh — armed irregulars, hoo- 
ligans. 

Chibuk — a long Turkish smok- 
ing-pipe. 

Dashnakzagan — Armenian na- 
tionalist party, supporters of 
the Young T ur\s prior to the 
Great War. 

Dircm — measure of weight 

equal to j grammes. 

Efiendi — the courtesy title of a 
gendeman; Turkish equiva- 
lent for Sir or Esquire. 

Endjumen — meeting of the 

Turhtsh cabinet. 

Entan — long outer smock. 

Ermeni millet — “the Armenian 
people." . 

Fcredjch — Moslem woman's 

veil. 

Ferman — decree issued by the 
Sultan. 

Giaour — infidel, Christian. 

Ginkahair — godfather (Arme- 
nian). 


821 



Hm« m ' - pm Ukf stetm^bath 
lumM. 

Hamidiyeh*— /l&Jiii Hami^t 
irregular troops of pogrom 
inciters. 

Hanum— /orm of address for 
women; Madam, Miss. 

lUxllsxcDr-doctor. 

Hoja — religious college. 

Hukiunet — headquarters of an 
admimstrative district, of a 
l{tttmahfim. 

Inshaat taburi — labour batteib 
ions, depSt soldiers. 

Irade — written decree of Sidtan 
of Turkey. 

Ittibad — the Young Turk/ 
"Committee for Union and 
Progress," the offiaal name 
for the Westernization move- 
ment which led the Revolu- 
tion of jgo8. 

Janizary music — after the music 
played by the Sultan’s jani- 
zones, a special body of Turk- 
ish infantry disbanded before 
the middle of the nineteenth 
century. 

Kaimakam — civil governor of 
a kpzah or administrative 
district; equivedent in mili- 
tary ranking of a heutanant- 
etdonel. 

Kangni — ox-cart. 


Kan^ -tie Tdr^h 
theatre. 

YiAfds.~rowboat . 

Kazah-a» adrdkmath^^ 

trict; subdivitiott of a 
*_ • a 

or region. 

Kdiab — broiled ir roast mutton, 

Yiid— languor, the dreamy state 
induced by drugs; Maaeoi 
peace, qmet. 

Khan — caravanserai, inn. 

Khanzir — swine. 

Khavass — armed constable, serv- 
ant, or courier. 

Kiafir — infidel. 

Kismet — fate, destiny. 

KcJagasi — Turkish staff cap- 
tain. 

Komitaji — member of a Balkan 
guerrilla band. 

Konak — an official residence or 
government house. 

Lokum — Turkish sweetfurats. 

Medjidjcb — silver coin worth 
/p piastres or 84. cents. 

Mevlevi dervishes — Islamic fa- 
natics. 

Millet — people, nation. 

Mohaj irs — refugees. 

Muafin — police chief. 

Miidir — minor civil o 0 eui in 
charge of a nahiyeh or tub- 
district; equivalent in mili- 
tary ranking of a lieutensmt. 

Mukhtar — mayor. 


8 aa 



llidSiAh-i« Umrmi teuHtfr, pt- 
ftpadtr Uuv «f Uam. 

I^p l iriir i t nm nfer, henU. 

h^fffgasAt’^ivU administrator 
4f-0 tanja]( or region; eqtuva- 
den^ in m^uary ranging of a 
etdond. 

Kaluydi — administrative sub- 
iisniet; subdivision of a \a- 
xah. 

Naigilfh — ppe for smo\ing 
through water. 

Oka — Turlftsh measure of 
weight, about lbs. 

OT!tsxA\\r— sergeant-major. 

Padishah — one of the Sultan’s 
udet; as an adjective, equiva- 
lent to "tmpenal.” 

Para — com worth t/40 of a pi- 
astre, or i/q of a cent. 

Pasha — an honorary tide placed 
often the name, given to of- 
ficers of very high ran\ both 
civil and military. The stress 
fads on the second syllable. 

Piastre — sdver coin worth about 
4^ cents. 

Raki — ardent spirits usually 
flavoured with anise. 

Redil'— home guard. 

Sanjak — large administrative 

region, cgming in order of 
scope between a Ijazah (dis- 

823 


trio) smd a i^ayat (pwp- 
iuee). 

Sap&As— gendarme. 

Selamlik — the reeepdowroom 
of the TurlfUh house. 

Sexst^o— residence of the Sul- 
tan, -or official palace of the 
government. 

Sciaskeriat — the War Ministry. 

Shalwar — baggy Tur\ish trou 
sets. 

Sublime Porte — the government 
of the Turkish empire. 

Sura — a chapter of the Koran. 

Tar — Armenian guitar. 

Tarbush — turban made by 
wrapping a scarf around a 
fee or red cap. 

Tekkeh — Moslem cloister. 

Teskeri — passport for travel in 
Turkish interior. 

Tonir — brick 
earth. 

Turbedar — holder of exdted 
office, "guardian" of the 
tombs of sultans and holy 
men. 

Ulema — a Mohammedan col- 
lege or body composed of the 
hierarchy. 

Vaitabed — Armenian ecdestat- 
dc. 

\^yet — chief administradve 
division of the Ottoman Em- 
pire; a province. 



gdvemor or prefect 
of a vilayet or province; 
equivalent in military rang- 
ing of a genend. 

Wcli — Islamic holy man. 
Yailadji — mountaineer. 


Yayli — ttvo-horse Coach. 
Yus-Bashi — major. 

Zikr exercises — Islamic devo- 
tions, practised by dervishes. 
Zilgith — ancient Turkish bmtie- 
cry. 


824 




